---

title: System and method for communicating information relating to a network resource
abstract: A system and method for communicating information relating to a network resource. A computer for displaying supplemental information about another document on a display screen for a user. Guiding individuals to places of interest on a network where information is stored, and/or displaying or otherwise presenting useful information to the user.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07433874&OS=07433874&RS=07433874
owner: 
number: 07433874
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051230
---
This application is a continuation of copending application Ser. No. 10 634 318 entitled A System and Method for Communicating Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Aug. 5 2003 which is continuation in part of Ser. No. 09 903 923 entitled A System and Method for Communicating Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Jul. 12 2001 now abandoned which is a continuation of Ser. No. 09 193 756 filed Nov. 17 1998 entitled A System and Method for Communicating Information Relating to a Network Resource now U.S. Pat. No. 6 292 813 which claims the benefit of provisional application Ser. No. 60 066 058 entitled A System and Method for Communicating Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Nov. 17 1997.

Ser. No. 10 634 318 is also a continuation in part of application Ser. No. 10 403 936 entitled Communication of Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Mar. 31 2003 now abandoned which is a continuation in part of non provisional application Ser. No. 09 566 703 entitled Communication of Supplemental Information For A Network Resource filed May 9 2000 now abandoned which claims the benefit of provisional application Ser. Nos. 60 172 168 entitled Communication of Supplemental Information For A Network Resource filed Dec. 17 1999 60 167 479 entitled Communication of Supplemental Information For A Network Resource filed Nov. 24 1999 and 60 133 781 entitled Communication of Supplemental Information For A Network Resource filed May 12 1999.

Ser. No. 10 403 936 is also a continuation in part of Ser. No. 09 258 873 entitled Communication of Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Feb. 26 1999 now abandoned which claims the benefit of provisional application Ser. Nos. 60 110 776 entitled Communication of Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Dec. 3 1998 60 091 708 entitled Communication of Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Jul. 3 1998 and 60 076 147 entitled Communication of Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Feb. 26 1998.

A continuing difficulty in today s information rich society is the effective communication of pertinent information to individuals who are most interested in such information. Some of the systems and methods disclosed herein relate to the fields of information retrieval and information presentation. Specific embodiments and features and the nature of the present invention may be understood by reference to the following detailed description and the drawings.

Another type of object window is also displayed on the display . The window is a representation of a document retrieval browsing and or viewing program that is used to view or interact with information or resources either stored locally on the computer or retrieved over a network. The window has a title area that displays the title of the resource or document being displayed along with the server on which the document is located. The title area could also display the location or address of the document being displayed or also the universal resource locator of the document being displayed. Alternatively an additional area within the window could be used for displaying the universal resource locator in the manner implemented by commercially available browsers.

Shown within the document viewing area of the window in are the contents of a document or page published by Universal Theatres Inc. and made available at its server over a wide area or global network e.g. the Internet s World Wide Web . This particular document or web page relates a motion picture produced by Universal Theatres entitled Flying Over The Precipice. As indicated in the window actors named Warren Barrett and Annette Foster star in the movie. The document or page shown in window is made available by Universal Theatres on a wide area or global network for browsing by for example people that may be interested in seeing this particular movie. The page in or others accessible from it may provide information about which local theaters are showing the movie and the times it is being shown. The page may also offer previews of the movie in the form of audio or video clips that encourage the viewer to see the movie.

Still referring to some promotional information is also provided in an area on the right side of the page. This promotional information is in the form of a list of favorable reviews that have been given to the Flying Over the Precipice movie. For example Joel Seagull of ABC News gave the movie five stars and other reviewers also gave the movie a favorable review. These reviews might be selected by Universal Theatres Inc. for inclusion in this page to encourage the viewers of the page to see the movie. For this reason favorable reviews may sometimes be the only reviews included such a page.

A banner advertisement is also displayed at the top of the page which promotes another Universal Theatres movie Time Will Tell. Selection of such a banner ad may retrieve and display in the window information about the advertised movie. The banner ad could alternatively promote other entertainment choices or other goods or services if Universal Theatres chooses to sell advertisement space on its pages to third parties. For example a supplier of soft drinks to patrons of movie houses showing Universal Theatres pictures may choose to invest in advertising on one or more of Universal Theatres pages.

In a simplified representation of a video display or screen is shown where window is present as was the case in but in addition a window is also shown on the display. In the embodiment shown the window is displayed automatically when the user retrieves and displays the Universal Theatres page shown in window . The window contains excerpts from various reviews of the movie Flying Over the Precipice. 

In the particular embodiment shown in the information in the window is not created or published by Universal Theatres. This information is instead created and published by a third party in this embodiment such as a movie review organization that seeks to provide a well balanced and even handed representation of the reviews a particular movie is receiving. The page published by Universal Theatres and shown in window in may not link to or point to where the information in window can be found on the network.

Shown in window are four reviews of the movie Flying Over the Precipice including the favorable review by Joel Seagull of the fictional ABC News. The other three reviews shown in window from Wire Services Ratings MetroPages Reviews and TimeLine Reviews are not as favorable and may discourage the viewer from seeing the movie Flying Over the Precipice. In fact the information provided in window reveals quite a different tone from the reviewers than the set of reviews cited by Universal Theatres on its Flying Over the Precipice web page in window . Universal Theatres has omitted from its Flying Over the Precipice web page shown in window some of the reviews quoted in window .

As can be seen from the embodiment of the information provided by Universal Theatres on the page shown in window may not be an accurate or even handed representation of the reviews the subject movie is receiving. Nor would one necessarily expect that Universal Theatres would provide an entirely accurate representation of the reviews for Flying Over the Precipice if many of those reviews are unfavorable. To do so may be counterproductive for Universal Theatres because unfavorable reviews would not effectively sell the movie to people who view the page shown in window . The information provided by Universal Theatres in its publications and on its web pages may not be wrong or incorrect but at least in some situations this information is likely to be slanted in a manner that is favorable to Universal Theatres.

In the embodiment shown in the information provided in window provides a revealing supplement to the information on the Universal Theatres page shown in window . The information in window therefore may be quite useful to a person contemplating going to a movie because the viewer will be able to consider a more representative sample of the reviews the Flying Over the Precipice is receiving. Universal Theatres however may prefer to keep unfavorable reviews from the viewer of its page when the reviews are generally unfavorable. But in other situations or embodiments Universal Theatres may not object and may even encourage the communication of information of this type to the user. 

It may be possible for the user to go directly to the place on the network where the information shown in is found. However at least in some situations the user may not know where to find these reviews and may not even know that there is a resource for such information. Yet the user may in these situations know where to find the Universal Theatres Flying Over the Precipice page that is shown in window . Universal Theatres may have heavily marketed the movie and as a result the user may know the location on the network where information about the movie can be found. Thus at least in some cases the user is more likely to go to the Universal Theatres page when interested in a particular movie produced by Universal Theatres. Yet the information that the user will find there may describe Universal Theatres movies favorably making an assessment of the entertainment value of a particular movie both difficult and potentially inaccurate. The supplemental information shown in window may make such an assessment easier or more accurate.

At in the browser or another program that works in conjunction with the browser then sends information describing and or identifying the displayed document to computer arrow in . In the embodiment shown the computer differs from the server from which the browser retrieved the displayed document. A computer such as computer may be referred to in some embodiments as a reference server because requests are sent to it to see if supplemental information is available for a particular document on the network. Thus it is used at least in part as a reference. The information sent to computer in the embodiment of includes the server from which the displayed document has been retrieved i.e. server as well as the identity of the document or resource on that particular server that is being displayed at the client . For the example of the server is the Universal Theatres Inc. server and the specific resource on that server is the Flying Over the Precipice document. See title bar in .

Upon receipt of this information from the client computer computer checks a table or a database of servers and documents to determine if there is supplemental information available for this particular document. The computer then sends a response to computer that indicates whether supplemental information is available for the identified document i.e. the Flying Over the Precipice document and if so the computer includes the supplemental information in its response. See arrow in . The browser or the program operating in conjunction with the browser then displays the supplemental information . In the embodiment of the supplemental information available for the Flying Over the Precipice document stored on Universal Theatres web server is the reviews information shown in window in . This supplemental information is sent to the client computer arrow by the computer and is displayed in window along with the Flying Over the Precipice document as shown in .

In the programs and may be informed of the identity of the document presented to the user by the programs and through interprocess communication. It may be appropriate in other embodiments however for the program or the program to access the network connection or network stack or operating system software directly and analyze the information or packets being passed over the network. The data on the network may need to be analyzed and or decoded to decipher the necessary information about the identity of the document presented to the user. It should be understood that any known or hereafter developed technique for identifying the content being presented to the user could be used and such techniques may also be applicable to the present invention. The present invention need not be limited to the interprocess communication techniques described in connection with .

If the server does find at and that there is supplemental information for the specified document the client computer is so informed at and the client computer is also informed at where the supplemental information can be found. Where there is no supplemental information for the specified document the reference server informs the client that no entry exists for the specified document which the client understands to mean that there is no supplemental information for the specified document. The loop and is then reentered.

There are entries for other documents in such as the index document from the Hunan Taste server. This document has supplemental information available and that supplemental information is contained within the document metro pages quote and is stored on the oriental specialties server. Similarly the dine in menu document on the Hunan taste menu also has supplemental information within document dine in menu at the oriental specialties server. By referring to the entries in the look up table the server is able to determine whether supplemental information is available for any given document. In the embodiment shown in if there is no entry in the look up table for a document no supplemental information is available for that document.

In some embodiments of the present invention each time a new document or resource is presented to the user e.g. in window of a request for supplemental information is always initiated. In other embodiments the client computer only occasionally sends a request over the network to determine whether there is supplemental information for the document displayed or otherwise presented at the client computer. is a flow chart illustrating a process in which the system waits at until the user requests that a new document be displayed. When the user makes such a request the requested document is displayed at . If the requested document is not from the same server as the previous document supplemental information relating to a previous document is removed from the display at . A message is then sent over the network to a reference server so that the reference server can determine whether supplemental information is available for the displayed document . If so the supplemental information is retrieved and displayed. However if the displayed document is from the same server as the previous document or if there is no supplemental information for the displayed document the waiting loop is entered.

The embodiment of thus operates to check the reference server for supplemental information only where the user requests a document that is stored on a server that is different from that of the previously displayed document. The amount of network traffic generated by repeated requests to the reference server is reduced in this embodiment because the requests are generated only when the user accesses to a new server. In a modified version of this embodiment the reference server is checked only where the domain has changed.

Thus in the embodiment of that portion of the look up table or database or whatever data structure is used that corresponds to a particular server is downloaded to the client the first time that the client computer retrieves a resource from a particular server. Thereafter the client need not use the network to determine whether supplemental information is available for any other documents stored on that same server because the information necessary to make this determination is stored locally on the client. This embodiment may be more efficient where the cost of making multiple requests over the network is high and the information that needs to be downloaded each time a new server is encountered is not too voluminous.

In a window from a document retrieval program or a browser is shown on the screen . The title bar identifies the server from which the document was retrieved i.e. the server controlled by Hunan Taste Inc. and the identity of the document i.e. index . This index document relates to a restaurant named Hunan Taste located in a hypothetical city s Redwood District. This document provides links to information about the Hunan Taste restaurant s daily specials and dine in and carry out menus which can be retrieved by the user by selecting one of the display elements . A delivery order from Hunan Taste can also be placed by selecting display element . A banner advertisement promotes an establishment called Jerico s Tavern which is located near Hunan Taste. In this embodiment Jerico s Tavern advertises on Hunan Taste s page because it seeks to attract patrons leaving Hunan Taste after dining. Because Jerico s Tavern is not a direct competitor to Hunan Taste Hunan Taste may permit even encourage Jerico s Tavern to advertise on the page shown in window .

When the index document from the Hunan Taste server is retrieved over the network and displayed in the window as shown in the window also appears on the display screen . The information shown in window relates to a competing Chinese restaurant called Oriental Specialties. A person viewing the Hunan Taste page shown in window is likely to be interested in going to a Chinese restaurant so Oriental Specialties has an interest in providing an advertisement to such a person. In some embodiments however Hunan Taste may not allow a competing restaurant i.e. Oriental Specialties to advertise on the page displayed in window . Thus Oriental Specialties may be unable to reach these potential customers through advertisement on Hunan Taste s pages. In other embodiments Hunan Taste may permit such activity. 

The window allows Oriental Specialties to communicate with the person viewing the Hunan Taste web page displayed in window . These persons may be considering a visit to the Hunan Taste restaurant or at least may be interested in Chinese food. In window Oriental Specialties provides information targeted specifically to individuals viewing the Hunan Taste page shown in window by quoting a magazine article in which Oriental Specialties is favorably compared to Hunan Taste. This may be targeted and effective marketing for Oriental Specialties because the message displayed in the window is likely to be seen by individuals looking for the very service that Oriental Specialties provides. In addition the person viewing the Hunan Taste page may also be interested in seeing the information shown in window . Because this person has retrieved the Hunan Taste page he or she likely is interested in Chinese cuisine yet may not know about the Oriental Specialties restaurant. Thus from the user s perspective the window may provide useful relevant and appreciated information that might not otherwise be seen when viewing the Hunan Taste page alone.

In the index document from the Hunan Taste Inc. server is displayed in window and in this embodiment a task bar is also shown on the display screen . This task bar has buttons that can be used to select particular programs or stores of information. In supplemental information is displayed in response to the user selecting e.g. through an input device the display element .

In the user has selected the display element causing supplemental information similar to that shown in window in to be displayed in the box . Although the button is provided on the task bar of it need not be and such a button or other functionality could be provided for example through a menu structure or through an icon elsewhere on the screen.

In another embodiment of the present invention shown in supplemental information relevant to the information displayed in a browser window is displayed in a scrolling window shown on the taskbar . The supplemental information may be scrolled in window where the window is quite small.

Once the supplemental information is retrieved over the network the display of is updated to that shown in . Window now includes an advertisement from ABC International Inc. in which that entity offers to sell widgets for a price that is lower than those sold by XYZ Corporation. Thus as shown in despite the fact that ABC International Ltd. is a direct competitor to XYZ Corporation ABC is effectively able to advertise in a manner closely associated with XYZ Corporation s pages and even at XYZ s point of sale. This can be a very effective scenario for advertisement precisely because the advertisement is so pertinent and of interest to the user viewing this particular XYZ Corporation page.

If the user selects the advertisement in window the display is in one embodiment updated to that shown in . is a point of sale page for ABC International where the user can specify the quantity of widgets that he or she wishes to purchase and can purchase them at this page. Thus the user may be able to move very efficiently from the point of sale at the XYZ Corporation page to the point of sale page at a competing manufacturer and compare prices and or features and selection very efficiently quickly and easily. In another embodiment a page for ABC International is displayed in a separate window or other display area leaving the XYZ page at least partially visible on the display.

As illustrated in the look up table of some network resources may have more than one supplemental information document or resource that is relevant to it. For example as shown in the widget purchase page on XYZ Corporation s server has three different entries in the look up table in . One way in which this situation is handled is to simply choose a single entry for a given document or resource and provide only that supplemental information document. Selection of the entry to be used can be done randomly or through a weighted or evenly weighted average for each of the available entries. Another method is to display a large number or all of the entries.

In another method of handling such a situation illustrated in the three supplemental information documents are rotated in the window in . Each advertisement may be paused for a preprogrammed period of time which may differ for each advertisement. shows the order in which each of the three advertisements are displayed in the window. This method allows multiple third parties to provide supplemental information that is relevant to single page. The amount of time that the advertisement or other message is displayed could depend on the rate paid by the advertiser. It could also depend on the number of advertisers or information providers that wish to provide information in this manner. In the embodiment of when the time period for the third supplemental information document i.e. JSO Technology is completed the order repeats.

When supplemental information is presented in the manner illustrated in where each is allocated a portion of time on the display the user may have difficulty selecting supplemental information when the time allocated for one or more instances of supplemental information is short. For example if each of the three instances of supplemental information illustrated in is displayed on the screen for only three seconds the user may have to act quickly in order to move the pointing device to the window or perform some other method of selecting the information in the window in when the desired supplemental information is displayed or otherwise presented to the user. If the user waits too long the next instance of supplemental information will be rotated into the window and the prior instance will be lost at least temporarily . This problem can be addressed by suspending the timer or some other similar mechanism that keeps track of the supplemental information during the time that the user is moving the cursor. For example while the user is substantially continuously moving the cursor or otherwise activating the input device on the screen in the supplemental information displayed in window will suspend or delay the process of rotating the next instance of supplemental information into the window . Thus if the user starts moving the cursor on the display just prior to the time for the instance of supplemental information displayed in the window to be changed the supplemental information may remain until the user stops moving the cursor. This provides a more forgiving environment for selecting transient display elements such as the window .

In the window includes within it an area in which supplemental information is displayed. This area is integrated into and may be part of the window . A button may be used to hide and unhide the area . In the embodiment shown selection of the button when the supplemental information area is displayed will remove from the window from the area . Thereafter the button will still be visible and selection of that button will restore the area . In other embodiments the area may be positioned in many different areas and in many different ways. For example the area could be configurable within the browser and retrievable through a keyboard command or menu selection.

A flow chart of a process for presenting a supplemental resource or supplemental content to a user is illustrated in . The system waits at until the user requests that a network resource be presented. At the presentation of any supplemental resource s relating to an earlier presented resource may be discontinued. In another embodiment the presentation of such a resource may be continued. The requested resource is then retrieved and presented to the user at . The presentation of this resource may involve an animation the execution of a program the playing of a video or audio clip the display of a text based document or any combination of these or other techniques. At the system determines whether there are supplemental resource s available for the currently presented resource. As described previously in one embodiment this may involve a request sent to a reference server that is different from that from which the currently presented resource has been retrieved. Alternate procedures could also be followed. If supplemental resources are available at at least one of these resources is retrieved at and presented to the user at . These resources may be a computer program a video or audio clip or both or any other form or type of content or multimedia.

In a browser window is shown on a screen and a page from the Hunan Taste Inc. server is rendered in the browser window . On the task bar is an icon button or display element . In the display element of has been selected with the cursor and the appearance of the display element has changed. In the embodiment shown the display element has changed shape and is shaded but any other visual or other indication technique may be used. After a period of time the display is further updated to that of where a window or area is displayed on the task bar . Within the area various display elements and are displayed.

Each of the display elements and represent a type of supplemental information relating to the content or information displayed in window . In the embodiment shown the presence of four display elements and means that four different types of supplemental information are available for the content rendered in the window . For an embodiment like that of if only one type of supplemental information were available for the content rendered in window only one display element would be displayed in the box . In another embodiment however a display element may be present for each type of supplemental information whether or not that type is available. In such an embodiment display elements may be modified or highlighted when supplemental information of the corresponding type is actually available.

In the display has been updated following the selection of display element with the cursor . The selection of the display element causes supplemental information of the type represented by display element to be displayed in the window in . The display element represents supplemental information relating to competing services or services that compete in some way with a given service provider. Because the service provider that is the subject of the content rendered in the window in is the Hunan Taste restaurant competing services may be for example other restaurants. And as shown in window displays supplemental information about a competing restaurant Oriental Specialties. A display element is shown in the window . This display element indicates which type s of supplemental information are being provided in the window .

When the display element is selected in the display is updated to that shown in and a request is sent by the computer to computer for information about the types of supplemental information available for the content rendered in window . The display is updated to that shown in to indicate to the user that information describing the types of supplemental information available for the content of window is being retrieved over the network. Because of network or other limitations the retrieval of this information may take time. Computer responds to the request made by computer by sending information about the types of supplemental information if any available for the content rendered in window . See the arrows labeled in . When the supplemental information types are retrieved they are communicated to the user such as in the manner shown in . In some embodiments the computer may also send the location and identity of supplemental information for one or more information types thereby making this information available for later use.

When the user selects the supplemental information type in supplemental information of the selected type is retrieved over the network e.g. from computer . See the arrows labeled in . The location of this supplemental information may have been identified when the types of supplemental information were previously retrieved from the computer . See arrow of . If not however the location of the supplemental information may be retrieved over the network from computer or from another computer on the network before the supplemental information is actually retrieved from computer .

Display element represents supplemental information or content relating to a competing product supplier. Supplemental information of this type for a page involving bicycles for example may involve information about another bicycle manufacturer or another bicycle distributor. This display element may represent supplemental information relating to any type of product. A display element of this nature can be used in a wide variety of other contexts and in many situations.

Display element represents supplemental information or content from a competing information supplier. This display element may be pertinent to a page from a news or business information provider. Selection of display element may cause information or content to be presented to the user that is published by a competitor of the publisher of the information already being presented to the user. For example for a page from a sports information site that publishes the latest sports scores and highlights supplemental information of this type may be information about a competing sports information site. A display element of this nature can be used in a wide variety of other contexts and in many situations.

As described the display elements and described above present information from or about a competitor to the subject of the information or content that is otherwise being presented to the user. The display element represents competing service providers and may be useful at least when the user is viewing or is being presented with content relating to a particular service provider. The display element represents competing product information and may be useful at least when the user is viewing or is being presented with a page describing a particular product. And the display element represents competing information and is useful at least when the user is being presented with content or information of a particular type e.g. news or business information .

Display element represents supplemental information relating to price and may be used to indicate that price information is available for the content or page being viewed by the user. For a page offering a particular product for sale supplemental information of this type may describe a competitor that offers the same or a similar product at a reduced price. Alternatively for the same page supplemental information of this type may be information from an entity that provides cost analysis or cost commentary for the offered product or for the company offering the product. Another example of the use of this type of supplemental information is shown in . A display element of this nature can be used in a wide variety of other contexts and in many situations.

Display element represents a type of supplemental information that relates to the actual information or content being presented to the user. For example for a movie or video display element may represent a review of that movie or video. For a news page display element may represent a review or critique of the publisher of the news page or of the particular news page itself. This type of supplemental information may differ from that of for example display element where it provides information about the content itself rather than similar competing content. A display element of this nature can be used in a wide variety of other contexts and in many situations.

Display element represents supplemental information of a type that is information about a given product service or instance of information. For a given product or service supplemental information of the type represented by display element may be a review or critique of that product or service. See e.g. . In another example for a product that requires assembly supplemental information of this type could include instructions on how to assemble the product. A display element of this nature can be used in a wide variety of other contexts and in many situations.

Display element represents supplemental information about a service. For example for a page describing or offering for sale a vacuum cleaner the display element may represent information about a home or office cleaning service. Or for a page describing how to select winners in the stock market display element may represent information from a discount brokerage house or a electronic stock trading service. A display element of this nature can be used in a wide variety of other contexts and in many situations.

Display element represents supplemental information about a product. For example for a page or video that describes how to construct landscape retaining walls display element may represent information from the manufacturer or distributor of a tool that easily splits the retaining wall blocks as may be required when constructing such a retaining wall. A display element of this nature can be used in a wide variety of other contexts and in many situations.

The foregoing display elements are described merely to illustrate the various types of supplemental information that may be made available and these categories are not meant to be exhaustive. And they may not be rigidly defined in every embodiment. Further different schemes for categorizing supplemental information can be used and it should be understood that any such alternate schemes for categorizing supplemental information may be applicable to the present invention.

Still referring to the system loops until the user selects a type of supplemental information at . When such a selection is made supplemental information of the selected type is presented to the user at . This supplemental information may be retrieved over the network or if it was already retrieved over the network it may be retrieved from local storage.

When the identity and or location of such a server is provided to the browser the browser communicates to that server the page or resource that is currently being presented to the user i.e. the Hunan Taste page . The server for supplemental information evaluates this request and then serves supplemental information. This supplemental information is then presented in the window as shown in replacing the content in window in

In an embodiment that differs from that shown in supplemental information from or relating to more than one source could be stored on a single server. This would allow some perhaps all of the supplemental information to be retrieved from the same server.

In window displays information relating to the hypothetical Acme Electronics Corporation. Acme Electronics may manufacture or sell a large variety of products and only a general page from Acme Electronics is displayed in window . Window displays a number of display elements representing different types of supplemental information available for the Acme Electronics server. When cursor selects display element which represents supplemental information relating to competing products another window appears. The window displays six different categories of products that the user can select. These categories represent products or categories of products that are manufactured and or sold by Acme Electronics Corporation.

When the user selects one of the products or categories of products in supplemental information that is from the selected category is presented to the user. In the user has selected the widgets category in window by selecting the widgets text in the window . This causes the window to be displayed in which supplemental information for three widget manufacturers or distributors that compete with Acme Electronics Corporation is presented.

Because of the nature of some types of networks it may be difficult to determine which document from a server is being retrieved by a client computer or presented to a user at a client computer. In other words for embodiments such as those described in connection with even where it is possible to determine which computer or server is being accessed on the network through the use of a domain name or IP address it may be difficult to accurately determine which resource or resources on that computer are being accessed. For example where documents are generated dynamically by the server they may not have a consistent name or URL. Also encryption techniques or the like can used to make determination of the nature of the document being presented to the user difficult. Similarly documents could be continually modified at least slightly to make consistent identification and differentiation from other documents difficult. In addition program or may not be capable of providing the identity of the document being retrieved or presented. Thus particularly where the person or entity in control of a server wishes to make accurate identification of a resource on the server difficult the identity of the specific resource or document that is being presented to the user may be difficult to determine. A menu such as that shown in may be useful in such a situation because it allows the user to select which type of information he or she is seeking at a particular site. Thus one at least partial solution is to provide a menu so that the user can select the type of supplemental information that he or she wishes to see.

The menus of are shown in connection with various implementations of the present invention but it should be understood that other types of menus perhaps having additional levels could be used where appropriate. Further the menus shown in are merely illustrative and it should be understood that many other menu structures or user interfaces known in the art or hereinafter developed may be applicable to the present invention.

In the window displays information relating to the Acme Electronics Corporation in a manner similar to that shown in . A display element or button is shown on the task bar . The user selects button when he or she wishes to see categories of supplemental information. In the user has selected display element thereby causing window to be displayed as shown in . This window communicates categories of products and services available from Acme Electronics Corporation. The window also indicates the types of supplemental information available for each of the categories. For example for the printers category supplemental information about services relating to printers manufactured or sold by Acme Electronics is available. Price information about the printers manufactured or sold by Acme is also available. In addition information about printers manufactured or sold by competitors to Acme is available.

In the user is selecting with the cursor the display element which represents a type of supplemental information in the widgets category of window . The display element that is being selected by the user is the competing product icon for the widget category. After the display element is selected the display is updated to that shown in where supplemental information relating to competing suppliers of widgets is shown at . In the embodiment of the categories and supplemental information type display elements remain on the screen while the supplemental information is presented to the user. In another embodiment shown in the competing product supplemental information is presented in the window but the categories and supplemental information type display elements shown in window in are removed from the screen.

Referring again to one or more display elements are shown for each of the categories shown in window . Although has been described in connection with the selection of display element the user may select other display elements e.g. for the widget category. Where other display elements are selected supplemental information that corresponds to the selected display element would be presented to the user. Display elements from any of the other categories shown in window could also be selected which will result in the presentation of appropriate supplemental information for the selected category and supplemental information type.

The system of could also be configured to allow the selection of the category itself without selection of any particular display element for the category. When the user selects the category e.g. by selection of the text describing the category supplemental information of all types may be presented to the user. Such an embodiment may be useful where the user wishes to see all of the supplemental information for a particular category.

In an application that presents audio content to the user is represented by window . The audio content is published by an entity called WCAR and the audio content is a play by play broadcast of a Cardinals football game. As shown in the window the Cardinals lead that game in the second quarter. In window a full motion video from the Universal Theatres server being presented. The video shown in window is the Flying Over The Precipice movie. Thus for the screen of audio content is presented to the user in window and video content is presented to the user in window . A portion of the window is shaded or colored or otherwise marked so as to communicate to the user which of the window on the display is the active window. Because the content relating to both of the windows and present audio to the user it may be desirable to present audio from only one source. In the window is shown to be the active window and it may have been placed in that condition by selection by the user e.g. using the cursor by default e.g. it may be the most recent window to appear on the screen or in any other way. In the embodiment of audio from the active window is presented to the user while the audio from window is muted. The motion video in window may or may not continue.

Still referring to the user selects the display element in the box which causes the display screen to be updated to that shown in . In supplemental information about other competing content is provided in the window . The supplemental information displayed in window describes a live audio broadcast of a Gophers football game where the Gophers are leading 14 to 3 with 12 19 left. This information is related to the content being presented to the user in window the active window in . The window also indicates that a commercial being broadcast in connection with the Gophers game will end in only four seconds. This type of information may encourage the user to select the content described in the window . Similar types of information may be provided in other situations. For example if the Gophers game were at half time the user may switch to a broadcast of another game e.g. the Cardinals game while the Gophers game is at half time. The window in such a situation may allow the user to keep track of when the Gophers game resumes for the second half. Similarly the user can keep track of when a particular program or sporting event broadcast via audio video or otherwise ends or when the Gophers game gets closer than it currently is. All this may be done while listening to the Cardinals game or when other related content is being presented to the user.

When the user selects the window in the broadcast of the Gopher game is presented to the user and the broadcast of the Cardinals game is turned off or it may be reduced in volume. In the user has selected the content represented by the window in thereby causing the display of to be updated to that of . Window is the active window in . The window of shows the score of the Gophers game. The window may or may not remain on the screen. If it remains on the screen it may be continually updated so that the score of that game is presented to the user at least visually. In another embodiment supplemental information about the content being presented in connection with the active window is presented to the user. This supplemental information may relate to the Cardinals football game or it may describe another type of supplemental information.

Supplemental information relating to the video presented in window in could also be presented to the user e.g. in window . For example supplemental information could describe content that starts or that can be configured to start just as the video rendered in window completes. Alternatively supplemental information from the manufacturer of a product that is used or shown in the movie e.g. an automobile or clothing could also be presented. Thus supplemental information can be presented in connection with many types of content and need not be limited to text but can fully encompass audio video animation and any other type of content.

For purposes of illustration and example the network documents described and illustrated in many of the Figures herein are shown displayed within a window controlled by an application program such as may be represented by window in . It should be understood however that such documents or resources could be displayed in other ways. For example the contents could be displayed on the entire desktop or a portion of the desktop. In another embodiment the contents might be scrolled on the screen perhaps under other windows. Further windows could be controlled by the operating system rather than by an application program. The manner in which information is being presented to the user herein is for illustration purposes only and should not interpreted as limiting the present invention.

Further the present invention has been described principally in terms of computer network available documents containing text graphics animated graphics or other objects. It should be understood that the present invention is not limited to only those particular types of network resources. Rather the present invention can be implemented using audio video or other types of multimedia beyond that shown. For example the supplemental information could be an audio clip or an applet or application program that carries out a useful function that relates to the resource displayed or otherwise presented to the user. In addition the term computer as used herein should be interpreted broadly to encompass all systems devices or machines that have a general or specialized processor or microprocessor or a similar device known in the art or hereinafter developed.

Also embodiments of the present invention may be integrated with one or more payment or transaction processing systems or the like so that a person viewing certain types of content and or certain types of supplemental information or supplemental content will incur a fee or a transaction cost. Authentication and automatic payments techniques may also be used.

In a networked environment such as that of there are numerous ways in which software can be installed distributed and or executed on the various computers on the network. illustrates a conventional way in which desktop software is installed and executed. In a computer program is installed at the computer through some type of installation program typically started by the user of the computer and executed on the computer . During installation the program may need to be configured at the computer for use with the network in order to enable access to other computers on the network e.g. and . After installation the computer program resides and executes at the computer and is persistent. When the computer is shut down or restarted the program continues to be stored at the client on non volatile storage media. Upon restarting the computer the program is available for use without reinstallation.

The computer identifies at one or more programs embedded within the accessed object. The client computer then determines whether each embedded program has been installed previously on the computer . This can be done by searching the computer s storage or system registry for the program or for the program s identifying characteristics. In Microsoft s ActiveX COM architecture for example this is done by searching the registry for an instance of the program s globally unique identifier GUID in the system registry.

If the embedded program has been installed on the client computer the previously installed program is retrieved from local storage at and executed at . However if the program has not been already installed on the client computer it is retrieved over the network and installed on the client computer. The installation process will typically involve updating a system registry or other persistent storage with identifying information on the computer .

Preferably the program is installed at such that it need not be downloaded again over the network when it is encountered embedded within another object. For example if the computer were to access an object on computer that had program embedded within it the program would not need to be installed again because it has already been installed when computer was accessed.

A system in which software is downloaded over the network perhaps from an untrusted server has significant security risks associated with it and for this reason security restrictions may be placed on computer programs downloaded from the network. Thus a downloaded computer program may be unable access some of the resources of a client computer or of the network generally. In some embodiments however a downloaded program may be tested for authenticity and safety through a code signing procedure or through a code verifying procedure. If such a program passes such authenticity tests it may be given more complete access to system or network resources.

Shown within the document viewing area of the window in is the contents of the document from . The document has been displayed in the window in response to a user query which might involve a key word search or might involve the user specifying the address or resource locator of document . The document could be also be displayed within the window in response to the selection of a link in another document not shown that points to the document .

The links and are visible within the document shown in . The link is actually a banner graphic advertisement for Gaylord s Restaurant and it also acts as the link . Selection of the link by an input device e.g. mouse or voice recognition causes the home page for Gaylord s Restaurant to be retrieved from the network and displayed within the window . The links and are hypertext links to two other documents. Selection of one of these links with the input device causes the document corresponding to the selected link to be displayed in the window . In an alternate embodiment rather than displaying the selected document in the window when the link is selected the selected document could be displayed elsewhere on the display such as in a new window.

In hypertext links and point to documents and respectively. When the user selects link document is retrieved and rendered in the window as shown in . And when the user selects link document is retrieved over the network and rendered in the window as shown in

Referring again to document is five views in length. Each view corresponds to that amount of information that can be shown on the monitor at any one time. The number of views in a search document therefore depends on the size of the monitor s display. The five views that compose document are shown as views and . Document is six views in length and . Document is three views in length and and document is five views in length and .

The search documents of might represent the search documents found as a result of a query formulated to find all the documents in the database that include the phrase Hadley v. Baxendale. Each X in the search documents represents an occurrence of the phrase Hadley v. Baxendale. As can be seen the phrase Hadley v. Baxendale can be found in search document at two separate locations. Document has six occurrences and search document has three. Search document has one occurrence the title of search document is Hadley v. Baxendale. 

There are also related documents and shown in . A related document is a document that is somehow explicitly associated linked or otherwise connected to one of the search documents. For example if search document is a judicial opinion a related document might be a subsequent opinion in the same case e.g. an decision on appeal . Other related documents might be an opinion or scholarly article that cites or discusses search document or a list of judicial opinions that cite the search document. Any document that is usefully associated with the search document can be considered a related document. Often the related document does not satisfy the query so it is usually not one of the search documents. In some circumstances however the related document might satisfy the query so it can be a search document.

Related documents may also be related only to a particular view within a search document. For example a search document that is a judicial opinion may have numerous other judicial opinions cited in the text of the opinion. These cited opinions may be related documents but often they relate only to a particular view within the document. Depending on the implementation of the database system they might not be considered to be related to the search document as a whole. Thus they are available as related documents only when the corresponding cite is within the currently displayed view. In such an implementation the related documents are dependent on the view shown on the monitor at any given time.

The user uses one or more input devices to request particular views. For example an input device might be a keyboard that includes a next page key and a next document key. The next page key requests the next successive view view within the document currently being viewed document . The next document view requests the first view view of the next successive search document according to the ordering characteristic document . Many database systems have next page and next document commands or keys e.g. Westlaw LEXIS NEXIS and West Publishing Company s CD ROM products as well as others e.g. previous document previous page . Westlaw also permits a user to request a particular search document or page by typing a command. For example to view search document three the user types r3 to request page 2 i.e. view within the currently displayed document the user types p2. And in some systems multiple commands can be executed together by separating them with a semicolon so page two from document three view can be requested with a single command r3 p2. 

In the systems of the prior art when the database system receives the command to display a different view the requested view must be loaded from the database before it can be displayed on the monitor . Since retrieving information from the database is time consuming this loading process is undesirably slow. But in a system employing the present invention the time required to respond to the user s request for a different view the requested view is reduced by taking advantage of the fact that it is often possible to predict the requested view before the user actually requests it. In the present invention the view s that the user is likely to next request are preloaded while the user is reading the displayed view.

Thus in one embodiment of the present invention the view or views i.e. anticipated view s that are likely to be next requested by the user are preloaded e.g. in the background to the extent permitted by the time the user spends reading or studying the display view. When the user does request that a different view be displayed i.e. the user requests a requested view the requested view can be very quickly displayed on the monitor if it has already been preloaded into memory. Thus if the requested view is one of the anticipated views the database system is able to quickly respond to the user s request for the requested view.

As shown in while the user is reading or studying the display view view is identified as an anticipated view signified by the arrow from view to view . View is likely to be requested by the user because it is the first view of the next search document as defined by the ordering characteristic following search document . And while the display view is being viewed by the user the database system will preload view from the database into memory before it is actually requested by the user. After view is preloaded into memory the input device is checked to see if the user has requested that another view be displayed. If the user has requested that a requested view be displayed the database system checks to see if the requested view has been loaded into memory e.g. as the preloaded anticipated view . If the requested view is view it will have been loaded into memory as the anticipated view so view is retrieved from memory and displayed on the monitor. Since loading the requested view from memory is much faster than loading the requested view from the database the time required to respond to the user s request for the requested view is shortened dramatically. If the requested view is not in memory however it must be retrieved from the database.

Instead of loading the entire anticipated view before checking the input device in other embodiments of the present invention the input device is monitored during the time the anticipated view is being preloaded into the database. If the user requests a requested view the preloading of the anticipated view stops and the user s request is serviced. This ensures that the system is very responsive to the user s input. Such an embodiment can be implemented by checking the input device each time a segment i.e. a portion of the anticipated view is preloaded. If the computer is running multitasking and or multithreading operating system such an embodiment can alternatively be carried out using the various techniques appropriate for such an operating system.

In the embodiment of the retrieval system will attempt to load as many of these anticipated views as possible while the user is studying the display view . If enough time passes before the user requests a requested view the retrieval system may preload all four of the anticipated views thereby enhancing the likelihood that the next requested view will be in memory.

Once the user issues a request for a requested view the requested view is loaded from memory or from the database if necessary and displayed on the monitor. The process of determining and preloading anticipated views then starts over. For example if the requested view is view the display view will then become view shaded as shown in . The anticipated views would also change and might be identified as indicated by the arrows.

Subdocument views may be anticipated views because the user often is particularly interested in a particular portion of the search documents. If the search documents consist of a series of judicial opinions for example a user may only wish to view for each of the search documents the subdocument for the majority opinion and not the headnotes dissenting opinions etc. . Thus it may be appropriate for the anticipated views to be drawn primarily from a particular type of subdocument.

In other situations however the user may only wish to see the first subdocument view for each subdocument. It would be appropriate in these situations for the anticipated views to be primarily the first views from the various subdocuments within each document.

The retrieval system of the present invention identifies anticipated documents by focussing on the current display view. The current display view gives clues as to which view might be requested by the user because the display view identifies the user s progress in browsing the search documents. In other words the current display view identifies which search document in the sequence of search documents is currently being viewed. This information is useful because the search document immediately following and preceding the current search document as defined by the ordering characteristic is often the search document next requested by the user.

The view displayed just prior to the displayed view might also be a consideration in determining the anticipated views if it tends to show a pattern that can identify the user s next requested view. For example referring to if the user requests view of search document and then requests view of search document the retrieval system can consider these two consecutive display views and determine that an appropriate anticipated view is view of search document . View is the first view of subdocument which could be of the same type as subdocuments and the two subdocuments previously viewed by the user. Since the goal is to accurately predict the next requested view considering the views that the user requested in the past may be helpful if it tends to identify the views that the user will request in the future.

In general any appropriate adaptive prediction scheme can be used that uses the user s history of requested views and display views to accurately determine which views are likely to be next requested by the user. It might be appropriate in some cases to consider many display views in determining appropriate anticipated views. Longer histories may tend to identify patterns that would not show up if only a small number of recent display views are considered.

Tendencies can even be monitored over more than one research session in situations where a particular user or group of users tend to request views in a particular pattern each time research is done. In addition the user could be prompted to indicate the type of research being undertaken which may give clues as to what type of anticipated views are appropriate for efficient operation. Finally the particular databases used or type of research being done can be monitored by the database system and advantageously taken into account in determining anticipated views.

In the preferred embodiment of the present invention the anticipated views are drawn from both related documents and search documents. A fundamental distinction between related documents and search documents is that related documents are statically related to the search documents whereas search documents are dynamically related to one another. This difference is significant because unlike statically related documents no predefined link needs to be set up for search documents. A statically related document is always associated with a particular document regardless of the query the related document is therefore statically related . The search documents on the other hand are related to each other by the query. Since the query changes with each search the search documents are considered dynamically related to one another.

Some of the recent CD ROM products have implemented features such as hyperlinked text and timeline linked text clicking on a time line item will take the user to a relevant article . See The Top 100 CD ROMs PC Magazine Sep. 13 1994 p. 115. Links of this nature are static because they always apply and do not depend on any particular query run by the user.

The search documents are ordered by an ordering characteristic as described previously. Thus when a next document is requested it is assumed that the search document requested by a next document command is the search document that is next according to the ordering characteristic. If the search documents are ordered by publication date for example the next document will be interpreted as a request for the search document with the next oldest publication date.

In one embodiment of the present invention it is possible to make a number of different ordering characteristics available for use by the user in browsing the search documents. For example shows seven documents labelled a through g ordered according to four different ordering characteristics. When the display view is in document a the next document command can be a request for four different documents i.e. b e f or c depending on the particular ordering characteristic used. More than one ordering characteristic must therefore be considered when determining anticipated views if the user is capable of moving to a next document in the context of more than one ordering characteristic. This feature can be enabled by an input device command that allows the user to select the desired ordering characteristic.

The present invention is applicable to single user multiple user and many user databases but the present invention is most effective when used in connection with single user databases. The efficient operation of the invention depends on being able to retrieve data from the database very frequently perhaps continually. The present invention is quite effective with single user databases such as those on CD ROM or other mass storage devices this might also include a hard drive implementation . In a single user database the no other demands are being made on the database by other users so the database is often idle.

But since a many user or multiple user database must be shared among more than one user such a database will often be receiving simultaneous and continual requests for data. Databases in such a system are rarely idle so there is little time to preload anticipated views into memory. In such a situation the present invention will not be as effective in improving the response time to users requests for requested views. But in many user or multiple user database systems where the database is not as busy the present invention can be effective in reducing response times to users requests for information.

As dictated by the retrieval logic the database system then loads into memory a view from one of the search documents. See . This first display view is then displayed on the monitor. Normally the user will take a few moments to read or study the display view. During this time one or more anticipated views are identified. The anticipated views are views that the user is likely to request be displayed on the monitor after the display view.

The database system then begins to preload these anticipated views into memory from the database while also continually monitoring the input device to determine if the user has issued a request to display a different view i.e. a requested view on the monitor. Anticipated views are loaded into memory until the user requests a requested view.

When the user does makes such a request the database system then determines whether the requested view is in memory. The requested view may be in memory because it could have been preloaded into memory as an anticipated view. If the requested view is in memory the requested view becomes the new display view and it is displayed on the monitor. But if the requested view is not in memory the requested view must first be loaded from the database before it can be displayed on the monitor as the display view.

The anticipated views are a function of the display view because the views that the user is likely to request depend to some degree on the view the user is currently reading. In other words those views that are anticipated views when view is the display view are not likely to be the same as the anticipated views when view is the display view. Therefore as shown in the anticipated views are determined each time the display view changes.

When the display view is changed the anticipated views for the prior display view can remain in memory so that they are available if they are ever requested by the user. But if memory is limited the anticipated views for the prior display view can be deleted from memory preferably in an efficient manner e.g. anticipated views common to both the new display view and the prior display view are not deleted from memory . It is best to delete those views that are not likely to be requested by the user. It may also be appropriate to consider whether a view is likely to become an anticipated view in the future.

The number of anticipated views for a given display view does not have to be a predetermined or constant number but rather can vary depending on memory available. Typically the number of anticipated views for a display view is a trade off between the amount of memory available and the desired speed of retrieval. In instances where memory is plentiful where the number of search documents is few and or where the search documents are small it may be possible for all of the search documents to be completely loaded into memory. In such a situation the number of anticipated views for a given display view could be as high as the total number of views in the search documents. At the other end of the spectrum there might be only one or two anticipated views for each display view if memory is limited.

Embodiments of the present invention can vary as to how anticipated views are preloaded into memory. In the embodiments of one anticipated view at a time is preloaded into memory and the retrieval system does not begin preloading a second anticipated view into memory until the prior anticipated view is completely preloaded into memory. In other embodiments anticipated views are simultaneously preloaded.

Simultaneous preloading of multiple anticipated views can be done in a number of ways. In a multitasking operating system for example an appropriate time slicing procedure can be used to preload the anticipated views so that they are preloaded simultaneously. In another embodiment one segment from each anticipated view is preloaded in turn and the cycle is repeated until all the anticipated views are fully preloaded into memory or until the user s request for a requested view interrupts the preloading process . A segment is any portion of an anticipated view such as one or two lines or even a single byte of the anticipated view.

The present invention has been primarily described in the context of a general purpose computer implementation. As one skilled in the art will recognize however it is possible to construct a specialized machine that can carry out the present invention.

Generally although the present invention has been shown and described with respect to specific embodiments and or implementations various changes and modifications even if not shown or specifically described herein may be applicable to the present invention and are deemed to lie within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims. Any specific features or aspects of the embodiments or implementations described or illustrated herein are not intended to limit the present invention in a manner not required by the appended claims.

The following pending U.S. patent applications are hereby fully incorporated by reference into this application application Ser. Nos. 08 474 921 entitled Document Retrieval System Employing a Preloading Procedure filed Jun. 7 1995 now U.S. Pat. No. 5 715 445 08 487 925 entitled Document Research System and Method for Displaying Citing Documents filed Jun. 7 1995 60 028 251 entitled A Method and System for Communicating Information About the Contents of a Document filed Oct. 8 1996 60 047 554 A Document Retrieval System Including the Use of Profile Information filed May 22 1997 60 052 830 A System and Method for Communicating Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Jul. 17 1997 and 08 936 910 entitled A System and Method of Communicating Information Relating to a Network Resource filed Sep. 25 1997.

In addition the following publications listed below are also hereby fully incorporated by reference to the extent that they enable provide support for provide a background for or teach methodology techniques and or procedures employed herein.

