---

title: Methods and systems for providing MEMS devices with a top cap and upper sense plate
abstract: A method for fabricating a MEMS device having a top cap and an upper sense plate is described. The method includes producing a device wafer including an etched substrate, etched MEMS device components, and interconnect metal, a portion of the interconnect metal being bond pads and adding a metal wraparound layer to a back side, edges, and a portion of a front side of the device wafer. The method also includes producing an upper wafer including an etched substrate and interconnect metal, bonding the device wafer and the upper wafer, and dicing the bonded upper wafer and device wafer into individual MEMS devices.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07396698&OS=07396698&RS=07396698
owner: Honeywell International Inc.
number: 07396698
owner_city: Morristown
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051230
---
This application is a divisional application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 689 801 filed Oct. 21 2003 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 005 732 which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

The invention described herein was made in the performance of work under U.S. Government Contract No. DAAE30 01 9 0100. The Government may have rights to portions of this invention.

This invention relates generally to micro electromechanical systems MEMS devices and processes and more specifically to processes for providing MEMS devices which incorporate top caps or covers with upper sense plates.

One method of producing micro electromechanical structures MEMS is by bonding a patterned silicon wafer to a glass usually pyrex substrate. Portions of the silicon wafer are etched away leaving a mechanical silicon structure anchored to the glass substrate. The process is initiated with a glass wafer. A cavity is formed in the wafer using a wet or dry etching process. A depth of the etch determines a separation between the structure s capacitive elements. Metal layers are deposited and patterned on the glass forming conductive electrodes and interconnects. A heavily boron doped p epitaxial layer is grown on a separate lightly doped silicon substrate. A pattern is etched into the silicon wafer to a depth greater than the thickness of the epitaxial layer. The glass and silicon wafers are bonded together using anodic bonding. Using an etchant that etches lightly doped silicon but not p silicon the undoped portion of the silicon substrate is etched away leaving the freestanding microstructures. Such a process is generally referred to herein as a silicon glass MEMS process.

In most known MEMS devices the microstructure is exposed to the ambient environment during operation. At least some of the known problems associated with exposed microstructures are described below. Furthermore if it is desired to provide a special operating environment or simply protect the microstructure from the ambient environment the protection must be done at a packaging step.

One known packaging step is to bond a glass wafer containing recesses sometimes referred to as an upper wafer or top cap on top of the previously fabricated glass silicon wafer which is then sometimes referred to as a device wafer. At least part of the silicon structure on the device is a continuous support ring that completely surrounds but may or may not be connected to the microstructure. The second glass wafer is bonded to the seal ring forming the cavity. In addition it is desirable to have electrical leads extending from outside the cavities into the cavities. While such methods and devices have been contemplated they have not yet been successfully integrated into a manufacturing environment.

In one aspect a method for constructing a micro electromechanical systems MEMS device having a top cap and an upper sense plate is provided. The method comprises producing a device wafer including an etched substrate etched silicon device components and interconnect metal a portion of the interconnect metal being bond pads and adding a metal wraparound layer to a back side edges and a portion of a front side of the device wafer. The method further comprises producing an upper wafer including an etched substrate and interconnect metal bonding the device wafer and the upper wafer and dicing the bonded upper wafer and device wafer into individual MEMS devices.

In another aspect a top cap for a micro electromechanical systems MEMS device is provided which comprises a substrate comprising a surface and recesses formed in the surface and interconnecting metal deposited into and extending out of the recesses and onto the surface. The top cap further comprises at least one deep recess comprising a recess formed in the surface of the substrate and configured to be above a bond pad of a device wafer onto which the top cap is to be bonded.

In still another aspect a micro electromechanical systems MEMS device wafer is provided which comprises a substrate comprising a front side including a surface a back side edges extending between the front side and the back side and recesses formed in the surface. The device wafer also comprises interconnecting metal deposited into and extending out of the recesses and onto the surface a MEMS device formed from silicon and bonded to the substrate and a wrap around metal layer deposited on the back side and the edges of the device wafer. The wrap around metal layer is also extending onto a portion of the front side of the device wafer.

In yet another aspect a micro electromechanical systems MEMS device comprising a device wafer and an upper wafer is provided. The device wafer comprises a substrate comprising a front side including a device wafer surface a back side edges extending between the front side and the back side and recessed trenches formed in the device wafer surface. The device wafer also comprises interconnecting metal deposited into and extending out of the recessed trenches and onto the device wafer surface and forming at least one bond pad. A MEMS structure formed from silicon and bonded to the substrate and a wrap around metal layer deposited on the back side the edges of the device wafer and onto a portion of the front side are also part of the device wafer. The upper wafer is bonded to the device wafer and comprises a top cap substrate comprising an upper wafer surface and recesses formed in the upper wafer surface. The upper wafer also comprises interconnecting metal deposited into and extending out of the recesses and onto the upper wafer surface and at least one deep recess. The deep recess comprises a recess formed in the upper wafer surface which is positioned above the bond pad.

In another aspect a method for preventing electrical shorts in a MEMS device including at least one electrical interconnection passing under a support ring is provided. The electrical interconnection is in a recessed trench and a material filling the trench onto which the support ring is mounted is also provided. The method comprises forming a protective shield near the support ring which reduces incidents of particles shorting the support ring to the electrical interconnection.

Another problem with exposure known to affect MEMS device is temperature changes effects of which are illustrated in . Stress can be induced by various environmental factors. For example if the temperature in which a MEMS device operates changes a differential thermal expansion between a glass portion and a silicon portion causes stress gradients and deformation as illustrated. Substrate is constructed from glass portion and proof mass motor drive comb and motor pickoff comb all shown in are constructed from silicon portion .

The particulate problems illustrated in and above described are solved as illustrated in in the cross sectional view of MEMS device . Components of MEMS device identical to components of MEMS device shown in are identified in and subsequent Figures using the same reference numerals used in . MEMS device includes a top cap which provides a top for MEMS device and covers proof mass motor drive comb and motor pickoff comb . In one embodiment top cap is attached to substrate via a ring which is formed on substrate and encompasses the components of MEMS device and patterned into the same layer of material as proof mass sense plate motor drive comb and motor pickoff comb and their respective fingers and . In addition top cap includes an upper sense plate which in one embodiment is placed within a recess formed into top cap . In a specific embodiment ring provides support for and is anodically bonded to top cap to provide a hermetically sealed area sometimes referred to as cavity for operation of the components of MEMS device . However cavity does not need to be hermetically sealed.

Another known problem with utilization of top cap is the generation of sodium residue when bonding top cap to ring . Current bonding methods while very simple produce a large quantity of sodium residue. One known solution includes rinsing the wafer on which MEMS devices are fabricated with water during a dicing process. However that process does not guarantee that all residue gets removed. As described above water in cavity is undesirable. Debris residue and components of MEMS device sticking to one another are some of the problems associated with allowing water into the cavity although water has been utilized to remove sodium during a dicing process as described above.

Access to bond pads has also been an issue in known MEMS devices which incorporate top caps and upper sense plates . For example one known method of accessing bond pads for connecting to external devices utilizes an ultrasonic drilling process to form holes not shown in top cap prior to bonding to ring . These holes have chipped and cracked edges and the drilling may have leaves residual stress in top cap .

An upper wafer is then processed processes for the device wafer and upper wafer could be performed in parallel . Processing includes etching the surface of the upper wafer and adding interconnect metal and anti stick metal to the etched surface. Deep recesses are added to the upper wafer for eventual access to the bond pads on the device wafer. The upper wafer and device wafer are then aligned and bonded . Channels or streets which are deep recesses are cut into the upper wafer at locations that will align over the bond pads of the lower wafer to which external connections are to be made further illustrated in . The upper and device wafers are diced into individual dies.

In one embodiment recess and the portion of metal feature therein are covered with a glass material which provides a smooth surface at the same level as raised surfaces and . Part of metal provides an electrical lead to be utilized for an external connection. It is understood that device wafer may include multiple recessed trenches each having metal therein and filled with glass material to provide multiple electrical leads each providing a connection to a different component of device wafer .

At the same time a structure e.g. components of a MEMS device is patterned in a silicon wafer not shown . The silicon wafer is bonded to substrate . The combined glass wafer and silicon wafer are etched resulting in most of the silicon wafer being etched away leaving only the patterned portion of the silicon wafer firmly attached to substrate . Referring to the patterned portion of the silicon wafer attached to substrate includes MEMS device components for example proof masses motor drive combs motor pickoff combs support ring and protective shield . Support ring encircles a perimeter of the components on device wafer . Support ring is part of the support to which a top cap is bonded. Protective shield operates to prevent conductive particulates not shown from contacting support ring as described above with respect to protective shield shown in .

While it may be desirable it is not necessary to create recessed trenches in substrate wafer that pass underneath support ring . However metal in recessed trenches carry electrical signals from components of a MEMS device to the bond pads electrical lead . The bond pads are outside the cavity formed by support ring . Recessed trench and metal allow an electrical signal to pass into or out of the cavity without contacting support ring . If metal contacted support ring it would short various metal lines together and affect operation of the MEMS device. Also if a particle for example debris from sawing device wafer were to get lodged in the opening of the trench it could short metal to support ring .

In top cap is further configured with a deep recess etched in a portion of surface . As further described below deep recess in substrate is part of a process for providing access to bond pads of device wafer shown in . While shown as having a single recess and single deep recess it is understood that an exemplary top cap is configured with multiple recesses and deep recesses depending on the number of individual MEMS components and electrical connections to be made to those components. In addition it is also understood that top cap is a portion of an upper wafer which is bonded to device wafer and diced into individual dies as described above.

Anodic bonding of device wafer to top cap can be done by applying a high voltage between a back side of wraparound metal layer and a back side of top cap . In the absence of wraparound metal layer the voltage would be applied between device wafer and top cap . The voltage required to make such a bond is twice the voltage needed when utilizing wraparound metal layer and is higher than can be supplied by some commercial bonding systems without installation of a special power supply. More importantly however bonding processes which do not utilize wraparound metal layer cause sodium to migrate out of device wafer and deposit as a residue on the surface between device wafer and top cap .

For proper operation of the subsequent MEMS devices the residue must be removed so a water rinse is required at some point after the bonding process. Unfortunately it is very undesirable to get water into cavity between the wafers and it is not certain that the water rinse will remove all of the sodium residue. Therefore in one embodiment the bonding process which results in MEMS devices is adjusted from bonding methods which do not utilize wraparound metal layer and the sodium migration problem is alleviated as a result. Specifically an electrical contact from back side of device wafer where it contacts a wafer bonder chuck and a power supply to the silicon layer on front side of device wafer is utilized e.g. wrap around metal layer . Wrap around metal layer is deposited on back side of device wafer but deposited such that metal layer wraps around edges and a small distance onto front side as well. In one embodiment wrap around layer is applied by sputtering as long as appropriate fixtures and control of a bias voltage for substrate is supplied. Silicon and metal on device wafer are arranged such that the bias voltage is distributed to all parts of device wafer which lessens the incidence of sodium migration.

Deep recess which is typically 100 micrometers deep or more has been formed in top cap as described above with respect to . When top cap is aligned and bonded to device wafer these deep recesses will be directly above respective bond pads electrical leads of device wafer . After fabrication and bonding is complete and referring to access to electrical leads is provided by sawing. Deep recess allows top cap to be sawed without the risk of getting the saw blade too close to device wafer . This process is sometimes referred to as cutting a wide street into top cap . Deep recesses can be made by ultrasonic drilling as is known but ultrasonic drilling can leave very rough edges. Other methods of providing an access area to electrical leads include chemical etching or laser drilling. Finally the combination of top cap and device wafer are diced into individual dies which is symbolized in by showing that wrap around metal stops at edges of substrate .

In one embodiment after top cap and device wafer are bonded together there are two sawing operations. The first sawing operation includes sawing part way through top cap to expose bond pads on device wafer . If the saw blade is lowered too much there is a high risk that the saw blade will cut into device wafer . Deep recesses are at a depth such that the saw blade can be easily set well above bond pads. Wider cuts that are needed for complete access to individual bond pads can be performed utilizing two parallel passes of a standard narrow kerf saw blade or by a single pass of a wide kerf blade.

The second sawing operation is to cut bonded top cap and device wafer into the individual dies. Preferably any trenches below the support ring for example recess trench or gaps in support ring itself are designed to prevent water and debris from entering cavity during either of the sawing operations. In one embodiment glass material in recess prevents water from getting past support ring and into cavity .

The above described embodiments provide the known benefits of a top cap and an upper sense plate to a MEMS device in a format that is easily manufactured and which allows easy access to bond pads for electrically connecting to external devices. However it is contemplated that the methods and structures described herein extend to applications other than those which involve application of top caps and upper sense plates to MEMS devices. For example the wrap around metal layer and or protective shields may also be utilized on MEMS device which do not utilize a top cap to provide other manufacturing or performance benefits.

The herein described methods also involve utilization of a support ring for supporting the top cap which helps to provide a better controlled environment for operation of the MEMS device therein resulting in a more reliable operation. Therefore while the invention has been described in terms of various specific embodiments those skilled in the art will recognize that the invention can be practiced with modification within the spirit and scope of the claims.

