---

title: System and method for evaluating the operational status of a STB in a cable network
abstract: An STB analysis system comprises an STB checker client and an STB analysis server. The STB checker client comprises an STB query interface to communicate with the STB analysis server to acquire information indicative of the operational status of an STB and to display the information graphically. A user requests data relating to a particular STB by entering the MAC address of an STB into a query field. The STB checker client interacts with an STB analysis server to acquire information relating to the subscriber associated with the STB MAC address, the services authorized for the STB, and data indicative of the status and performance of the STB. In addition, the STB analysis server interacts with the STB operating system to retrieve diagnostic data from the STB logs. The STB checker client further is adapted to permit remotely resetting the STB regardless of its current status.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07810127&OS=07810127&RS=07810127
owner: Time Warner Cable, Inc.
number: 07810127
owner_city: New York
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050831
---
Embodiments of this invention are generally related to interactive cable television services and more particularly related to enabling a cable television service provider to remotely ascertain the status of a set top box STB over a network.

Cable television service began as a means for transporting broadcast signals to viewers who needed or desired better signal quality. Initially the transported signals were mapped to the broadcast channels. As more channels were added the over the air signals were mapped to channels within the cable selected by the service provider. At least in part this mapping relieved interference problems from local broadcast signals. A typical analog cable system provided 110 6 MHz channels. In order to receive these channels a subscriber required either a cable ready television or an STB. The STB evolved to provide additional features. For example premium channels were scrambled so that only those subscribers with an STB and an appropriate code could view the program.

With the advent of digital transmission the role of the STB has changed dramatically. Not only is digital signal transmission significantly more bandwidth efficient than analog e.g. 10 digital channels may be carried in one 6 MHz analog channel but the digital signal can be manipulated to include more and varied content. The STB as a digital device is also capable of two way upstream as well as downstream communication. With respect to video services modern set top boxes send upstream signals to the headend to request video on demand VOD services pay per view PPV services and switched video broadcast SVB services and to issue control commands play stop fast forward rewind and pause that affect the video stream. Two way STBs are addressable can be associated with a subscriber and can be associated with a physical location within an HFC cable network. STBs integrated with or connected to DVRs allow subscribers to determine what to watch and when.

The ability of the STB to interact with the digital signal the subscriber and the cable system operator is determined by the applications that operate on the STB platform. PowerTV Windows CE OS 9 JavaOS for Consumers and Sony Corp. s Aperios are examples of operating systems designed for STBs. Because of the diversity of STB OSs a standard middleware application interface referred to as the OCAP Project is being developed by Cable Television Laboratories Inc. OCAP specifies a standard set of application programming interfaces APIs for host devices so that those devices can receive the advanced two way interactive services and applications being provided by the cable operator. Cable subscribers with OCAP enabled digital televisions retail set top boxes and other interactive digital cable products will be able to receive all of the cable operator s services just as if the subscriber were leasing a comparable set top box from the operator. These advanced services and applications may include 

The hardware specifications of OCAP include the Host Core Functional Requirements a copy protection system including security and user authentication and the CableCARD module host interface. These hardware specifications define a removable security module that separates the cable operator s proprietary conditional access system from the retail digital cable device thereby enabling portability of the host to other cable networks. This means that if a consumer purchases a set top box or an integrated DTV in New York and then relocates to Los Angeles that set top box or integrated DTV will be operable with the new regional cable provider s equipment.

As STBs become more feature rich the task of supporting the STBs in a cable system environment requires sophisticated analytical tools to determine whether subscriber service issues are related to the STB or to other components of the cable network. STB performance tools currently require cable service technicians CSTs to walk subscribers through a complex series of diagnostic routines on the cable box in order to retrieve data for troubleshooting. These data are presented on multiple pages making navigation by subscribers confusing and time consuming.

Troubleshooting an STB may also require data indicative of the operational status of various components and systems of the cable network. Such data are useful in eliminating sources of problems with STB performance. Typical STB troubleshooting tools do not utilize these data.

What is needed is a system and method that provides a comprehensive view of an STB s performance without depending on subscriber interaction with the STB to produce troubleshooting data.

In an embodiment of the present invention an STB analysis system comprises an STB checker client and an STB analysis server. The STB checker client comprises an STB query interface herein SQI to communicate with the STB analysis server to acquire information indicative of the operational status of an STB and to display the information graphically. In this embodiment the STB checker client comprises the SQI a processor a display a user input and a LAN interface. In another embodiment of the present invention the processor display user input and LAN interface functions are provided by a general purpose computing device and the SQI functionality is provided by a Web browser.

A user typically but without limitation a customer service technician requests data relating to a particular STB by entering the MAC address of an STB into a query field. The STB checker client interacts with an STB analysis server to acquire information relating to the subscriber associated with the STB MAC address the services authorized for the STB and data indicative of the status and performance of the STB. By way of illustration and not as a limitation the STB checker client displays administrative information comprising subscriber identifying information and account information. In addition the STB analysis server interacts with the STB operating system to retrieve diagnostic data from the STB logs. The STB checker client is further adapted to permit remotely resetting the STB regardless of its current status.

It is therefore an aspect of the present invention to query diverse sources for data relating to an STB.

It is another aspect of the present invention to allow a user of the STB checker client to customize the STB checker client by selecting the STB data to be queried and displayed.

It is still another aspect of the present invention to permit the STB checker client to be operated on portable computing devices.

It is yet another aspect of the present invention to evaluate data relating to a failed STB to provide a diagnosis of the possible causes for the failure and to suggest steps to remedy the failure.

It is another aspect of the present invention to evaluate data relating to failed STBs to determine whether the data reflect a trend that may be used to develop preventive measures.

It is an aspect of the present invention to retain trend data relating to a particular STB and a group of STBs.

These and other aspects of the present invention will become apparent from a review of the description that follows.

In an embodiment of the present invention a set top box STB analysis server for a hybrid fiber coax HFC cable network comprises a query library a query checker processor and a display server. The query library comprises instructions for acquiring STB state data elements indicative of the state of an STB associated with an STB MAC address. The query checker processor generates an interactive graphical display that accepts a query from an STB checker client. In an embodiment of the present invention the query comprises the STB MAC address and identifies the queried STB state data elements to be obtained for the STB. By way of illustration and not as a limitation the STB state data elements are selected from the group consisting of subscriber data STB operational data network component data STB diagnostic data and VOD data.

In another embodiment of the present invention the subscriber data comprises a subscriber name a subscriber address an account number associated with the subscriber name the MAC address of the STB a cable network node assigned to provide upstream and downstream connectivity to the STB a description of the STB a description of a CPE unit associated with the account number a MAC address associated with the CPE unit a subscriber credit limit a subscriber pay per view credit limit and a descriptor indicative of whether the STB is enabled for digital cable.

In still another embodiment of the present invention the operational data comprise STB version operating code version the STB location in the network the private network address assigned to the STB VOD node set VOD service group and services which may be provided to the STB.

In yet another embodiment of the present invention the STB diagnostic data comprises an uptime measure an FDC signal level an RDC signal level a tuner frequency in MHZ that the STB is tuned to a tuner measure indicative of the adjustment necessary to tune to that frequency a QAM SNR applications currently running on the STB and a version identifier associated with an application.

In another embodiment the instructions for acquiring the STB diagnostic data from the STB are delivered to the STB as SNMP messages.

In another embodiment of the present invention the instructions for acquiring the STB diagnostic data from the STB are delivered to the STB as command line interface instructions.

In another embodiment of the present invention the VOD data comprises VOD streams accessed by the STB and VOD errors reported by the STB.

The query checker processor executes query instructions from the query library responsive to the queried STB state data elements to obtain the queried STB state data elements. The display server receives the queried STB state data elements and creates an STB analytical record from the STB state data elements. The STB analytical record is sent to an STB checker client for display. In an embodiment of the present invention the STB checker client comprises a Web browser and the analytical record comprises a Web page.

In an embodiment of the present invention the STB analysis server further comprises a result analyzer. The result analyzer determines whether an STB state data element is within a predetermined range. If the STB state data element is within a predetermined range the result analyzer assigns a first graphical attribute to the STB state data element. If the STB state data element is outside a predetermined range the result analyzer assigns a second graphical attribute to the STB state data element. The STB state data element and an assigned graphical attribute are assigned to a display server. The display server uses the STB state data element and the assigned graphical attribute to create the analytical record. In another embodiment of the present invention first and second graphical attributes are display colors.

In an embodiment of the present invention the STB analysis server further comprises a client network interface that communicates with the STB checker client via a client network. By way of illustration and not as a limitation the client network may be without limitation a wired network a wireless network a local area network or the Internet.

In another embodiment of the present invention the STB analysis server further comprises a cable network interface that communicates with the STB via a cable network path. In another embodiment of the present invention the path in the cable network path is a DOCSIS compliant channel.

In an alternate embodiment of the present invention the STB analysis server further comprises a result analyzer. The result analyzer receives STB state data elements and uses these elements to determine whether an STB state data element is within a predetermined range. The result analyzer selects STB state elements determined to be outside a predetermined range determines if the selected STB state elements are indicative of a common fault and if the selected STB state elements are indicative of a common fault identifies the common fault in the analytical record.

According to yet another embodiment of the present invention an STB comprises a digital video recorder DVR the query library further comprises instructions for acquiring DVR state data elements indicative of the state of the DVR and the query further identifies queried DVR state data elements to be obtained from the DVR. By way of illustration and not as a limitation the DVR state data elements to be obtained from the DVR are selected from group consisting of a number of recordings a number of scheduled recordings and free disk space.

Yet another embodiment of the present invention provides a method for evaluating the operational status of a set top box STB in a hybrid fiber coax HFC cable network. A query from an STB checker client is received. The query comprises an STB MAC address and identifies queried STB state data elements to be obtained for the STB. Query instructions are accessed from a query library responsive to the queried STB state data elements identified in the query. The query instructions are executed to obtain the queried STB state data elements. The STB state data elements are received at a display server. An STB analytical record is created and sent to an STB checker client for display.

In another embodiment of the present invention the queried STB state data elements are provided to a result analyzer. A determination is made whether an STB state data element is within a predetermined range. If the STB state data element is within a predetermined range a first graphical attribute is assigned to the STB state data element. If the STB state data element is outside a predetermined range then a second graphical attribute is assigned to the STB state data element. The STB state data element and an assigned graphical attribute are provided to a display server. An analytical record is created using the STB state data element and the assigned graphical attribute.

In another alternate embodiment of the present invention the queried STB state data elements are provided to a result analyzer. A determination is made whether an STB state data element is within a predetermined range. STB state elements determined to be outside a predetermined range are selected. A determination is made whether the selected STB state elements are indicative of a common fault. If the selected STB state elements are indicative of a common fault the common fault is identified in the STB analytical record.

The following terms are used in the description that follows. The definitions are provided for clarity of understanding 

In an embodiment of the present invention an STB analysis system comprises an STB checker client and an STB analysis server. The STB checker client comprises an STB query interface herein SQI to communicate with the STB analysis server to acquire information indicative of the operational status of an STB and to display the information graphically. In this embodiment the STB checker client comprises the SQI a processor a display a user input and a LAN interface. In another embodiment of the present invention the processor the display the user input and LAN interface functions are provided by a general purpose computing device and the SQI functionality is provided by a Web browser.

A user requests data relating to a particular STB by entering the MAC address of the STB into a query field. The STB checker client interacts with an STB analysis server to acquire information relating to the subscriber associated with the STB MAC address the services authorized for the STB and data indicative of the status and performance of the STB. By way of illustration and not as a limitation the STB checker client displays administrative information comprising subscriber identifying information and account information. In addition the STB analysis server interacts with the STB operating system to retrieve diagnostic data from the STB logs. The STB checker client further is adapted to permit remotely resetting the STB regardless of its current status.

In another embodiment of the present invention the STB analysis server retains usage data that may be used to assess trends in STB and network performance based upon area of service equipment type or customer premises.

In another embodiment of the present invention the display the user input processor and LAN interface are provided by a general purpose computing device. By way of illustration and not as a limitation the general purpose computing device may be without limitation a laptop computer a personal digital assistant or a handheld computer. In an exemplary embodiment of the present invention the general purpose computing device is an Intermec 6400 Keypad Handheld Computer. As will be appreciated by those skilled in the art other general purpose and portable wireless computing devices may be used to provide the functions of display user input processor and LAN interface without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Display may be without limitation an LCD a plasma or other display device. Input may be without limitation a mouse a touch pad a keypad a key board a touch sensitive screen a voice recognition system or other input device suitable for the particular computing device providing the functions of STB checker client .

In another embodiment of the present invention the functionality of SQI is provided by a Web browser.

SQI interacts with STB analysis server via processor LAN interface LAN and LAN interface . LAN interface passes STB queries from STB checker client to STB checker query processor within STB analysis server . STB analysis server may be without limitation located in a cable network headend in a cable network data center in a network operations center or other suitable location determined by the cable network operator. In another embodiment of the present invention STB checker query processor comprises a Web server that provides Web pages to STB checker client via SQI .

When STB analysis server is first accessed by SQI STB checker query processor generates an interactive graphical display that accepts an STB MAC address. The user enters an STB MAC address which is passed via processor LAN interface LAN to LAN interface within STB analysis server . The LAN and its associated interfaces and provide a communication path between STB checker client and STB analysis server . As will appreciated by those skilled in the art LAN may be without limitation a wired or wireless network and interfaces and are selected as appropriate to the network type.

STB checker query processor uses libraries of instruction sets to acquire data from various datastores. An instruction set comprises computer instructions that query a database for particular information relating to a particular STB. illustrates a subscriber query library a Central Control System CCS query library an SNMP query library and a command line interface CLI query library . However this is not meant as a limitation. Other query libraries may be used without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Referring again to STB checker query processor uses subscriber query library and CCS query library to obtain STB related information from datastore . By way of illustration and not as a limitation stored STB related information comprises subscriber identifying data account data registration data provisioning data data associating the STB with particular cable network components and data indicative of the current state of those cable network components to which the STB is associated. These data provide a picture of the physical location of STB in the cable network the service level to which the subscriber is entitled the service level to which the STB has been configured and the condition of the path between the STB and the cable network .

While datastore is illustrated as a single entity stored data relevant to the status of an STB may be distributed among a number of databases and storage devices. As will be appreciated by those skilled in the art datastore comprises these databases and storage devices.

STB checker query processor also uses SNMP query library and command line interface CLI query library to obtain diagnostic information directly from STB . Diagnostic information comprises values indicative of the state of the STB and logged historical data.

In an embodiment of the present invention STB analysis server further comprises a result analyzer and a display server . Result analyzer reviews the data acquired from STB query processor and assigns graphical attributes to any data that are outside expected limits. By way of illustration and not as a limitation a graphical attribute may be without limitation a display color a display intensity an object shape and a display modulation such as blinking or motion. These data and the graphical attributes are passed to display server which returns an interactive graphical display see to STB checker query interface . The content of the interactive graphical display represents an analytical record of STB . STB checker query interface then causes processor to output the interactive graphical display to display .

Cable network interface connects STB analysis server to STB in subscriber premises via cable network . STB may be integrated with or connected to an optional digital video recorder DVR .

The data blocks of Interactive graphical display are organized by the type of information provided and the source of the information. The SUBSCRIBER INFORMATION data block provides account information retrieved from the billing system. Customer name account number node and additional equipment on the account are listed in this section.

STB INFORMATION data block provides the live status data from the STB. A first group of LVPs reflects the operational configurations of the box as determined by the Digital Network Control System not illustrated . The first group of LVPs comprises the STB version operating code version its position in the network and the private network address assigned to the STB.

A second group of LVPs provides the broadcast channel and VOD information for the box. The second group of LVPs comprises values that reflect whether or not an STB is enabled for digital cable provide broadcast channel and VOD information and reflect the amount of pay per view titles the subscriber is authorized to purchase. The Node Set and Service group LVPs determine the status of the STB in the VOD network. VOD Streams and VOD Errors are links to sub sections that list information about the VOD purchases the STB has attempted. These fields are retrieved in part from the billing system the CCS database and a VOD content store platform not illustrated .

A third group of LVPs provides signal information and video diagnostic information obtained via SNMP. The third group of LVPs comprises values that reflect uptime the amount of time that has passed since the STB was last rebooted the FDC and RDC signal levels the STB uses to communicate with the CCS the current frequency in MHZ that the STB is connected to and how much adjustment was necessary to tune to that frequency. For digital channels values also reflect the QAM SNR representing the signal quality found on the channel frequency. Information indicative of the number of video data blocks that could not be corrected is also provided.

A fourth group of LVPs within STB INFORMATION data block identifies the applications currently running on the STB as well as the version of these applications.

DIAGNOSTIC PAGES SELECTION data block comprises links to individual pages of the diagnostic screens available from an STB.

In another embodiment of the present invention an LVP that is associated with a value range is assigned a graphical attribute related to its actual value. By way of illustration and not as a limitation if a value is found to be out of range of its associated range the LVP is displayed with a red background. If a value is close to being out of range the LVP is displayed with a yellow background. Otherwise the LVP is displayed using a default background color.

A SEND command block directs STB checker client see to send a check STB query to a cable network diagnostic system see as previously described.

In another embodiment of the present invention data block SUBSCRIBER INFORMATION comprises LVPs Subscriber Name Acct. No. Node and Equipment. The label Subscriber Name has the value of the name of the subscriber associated with the STB that was queried. The label Acct. No. has the value of the subscriber account number associated with the selected STB. The label Node is assigned an identifier that is associated with the node that is in the upstream and downstream signal paths of the STB. The label Equipment has the value of a descriptor and the MAC address of other network equipment associated with the subscriber s account.

In another embodiment of the present invention STB INFORMATION data block comprises LVPs Version Code Rev. Box Group Association Hub QPSK DEMOD 10NET IP Addr. Digital Service Channel Credit Limit PPV limit Node Set Service Group Uptime RDC FDC Tuner Tuner Freq. and Uncorrected Blocks. Hyperlinked objects VOD Streams and VOD Errors provide access to information concerning the VOD streams accessed by the STB and the VOD errors that were reported by the STB. Hyperlinked object Lineup provides access to an image of the channel assignments associated with the STB. Hyperlinked object TC Line allows a user to request a form of the signal related LVPs that may be copied and pasted to a trouble call work order.

The label Version is assigned a value indicative of the model number and version of the STB. The value associated with the label Box Group is indicative of the specific operating system download group to which this STB has been assigned. Box grouping is a method of defining what version of code should go to what STB. This value allows headend personnel to determine whether an STB is using standard operating system software or a beta version of an operating system and thus may operate differently than expected. In general use this value associated with the label Box Group will be Default indicating that the STB runs code available to every STB.

The value associated with the label Association is indicative of the application software assigned to an STB and is determined by the value of the label Box Group. This value is useful to headend personnel and to a Technical Support Representative as it allows them to determine if the STB is running the code it should be.

The value associated with the label Hub is an identifier that designates the hub associated with the STB.

The value associated with the label QPSK demodulator is an identifier that designates the QPSK and demodulator associated with the hub identified by the Hub LVP value.

The value associated with the label 10NET IP Address is the private IP address of the cable network facing interface of the STB.

The label Channel is assigned the value of the channel to which the STB is tuned at the time the STB query was received by the cable network diagnostic system see .

The label Credit Limit is assigned a value indicative of the current credit that may be extended to the subscriber.

The label PPV limit is assigned a value indicative of the current credit that may be extended to the subscriber for pay per view programming.

The label Service Group is assigned a value indicative of a logical grouping of STBs to which a particular STB has been assigned and is determined when a subscriber orders a VOD product. STBs in the same Service Group share a set of VOD resources.

The label Node Set is assigned a value indicative of a subgrouping of STBs within a Service Group to which a particular STB has been assigned and is determined when a subscriber orders a VOD product. The node set and the service group combine to define what VOD frequencies a given STB can view.

The label Uptime is assigned a value indicative of the elapsed time since the STB was registered with the cable network.

The label RDC is assigned a value indicative of the frequency to which the reverse data channel transmitter is currently set.

The label FDC is assigned a value indicative of the frequency to which the forward data channel the out of band channel transmitter is currently set.

The label Tuner is assigned a value indicative of the adjustment required to lock into the tuner frequency.

The label Tuner Frequency is assigned a value indicative of the frequency to which a cable box is currently tuned.

If the STB is tuned to a channel at the time the STB query is received by the cable network diagnostic system see then the label QAM SNR is assigned a value indicative of the signal to noise ratio of the QAM modulator through which the STB communicates.

The label Uncorrected Blocks is assigned a value indicative of the number of data blocks that could not be corrected using forward error correction. An excess of these may indicate a faulty STB or an otherwise invisible signal issue.

The labels Applictn and Applictn are assigned values indicative of the software applications currently running on the STB. While two LVPs are illustrated in as will be appreciated by those skilled in the art additional applications may be displayed by the interactive graphical display without departing from the scope of the present invention. Associated with each of the application LVPs is a version label that is assigned a value indicative of the version of the application to which the version label is associated.

In another embodiment of the present invention SERVICES comprises LVPs Service A Service B and Service N. Each of these LVPs is associated with a value indicative of the services the subscriber is entitled to receive via the STB. While three service LVPs are illustrated in as will be appreciated by those skilled in the art any number of service LVPs may be displayed by interactive graphical display without departing from the scope of the present invention.

In another embodiment of the present invention DIAGNOSTIC PAGES comprises action links Page 1 Page 2 and Page N. The action links may be individual and cumulatively selected. A send command block invokes a diagnostic page query utility not illustrated causing a diagnostic page query request to be directed to an STB diagnostic page query processor not illustrated . The STB diagnostic page query processor not illustrated creates framework commands that query the STB operating system for diagnostic data stored in various logs of the STB.

Referring to a user accesses an STB analysis server and receives an interactive graphical display comprising multiple LVPs and hyperlinked objects. The user enters a MAC address in a field of the interactive graphical display . Data is acquired to evaluate the MAC address that was entered . The STB checker query processor see simultaneously launches a billing system query A and a CCS query B. The billing system query is generated by reference to a subscriber query library see that comprises data request scripts constructed to obtain particular data elements from the billing system datastore . Similarly the CCS query is generated by reference to a CCS query library see that comprises data request scripts constructed to obtain particular data elements from the CCS datastore . The queries return data that is used to evaluate the STB MAC address. By way of illustration and not as a limitation the billing system query returns a subscriber account number and information as to whether the subscriber is entitled to receive service. The CCS query confirms whether the STB associated with the STB MAC address is known to the network.

A determination is made whether the STB MAC address is valid . If the MAC address is not valid the user is prompted again to enter a MAC address . If the MAC address is valid then the STB status is determined . A DNS query is issued B for data in the CCS datastore relating to whether the STB is enabled and if the STB is online . If the STB is not enabled and or the STB is not online the account information associated with the STB and status of the STB are captured and passed to a result analyzer see where the results are analyzed . Data is parsed to associate a value with a label to produce an interactive graphical display see and returned to the user for display.

If the STB is determined to be enabled and online communication with the STB is initiated . In another embodiment of the present invention this communication is accomplished by simultaneously issuing a CLI query A and an SNMP B query of the STB. The SNMP query is generated by reference to an SNMP query library see that comprises data request scripts constructed to obtain particular data elements from the STB that are available through SNMP. Similarly the CLI query is generated by reference to a CLI query library see that comprises data request scripts constructed to obtain particular data elements from the STB that are available through a command line interface.

The results of the SNMP query and CLI query along with account information associated with the STB and status of the STB are passed to a result analyzer see where the results are analyzed . Data is parsed to associate a value with a label to produce an interactive graphical display see and returned to the user for display.

To illustrate the operation of the STB checker client and STB analysis server consider a subscriber who is reporting pixilization of the image on a specific digital channel. In this situation a CST would access the customer s account in the billing system to retrieve the MAC address of the STB in question and enter this address into the STB checker client. The STB analysis server determines that the STB is operational and assigned to an account. The STB analysis server then proceeds to retrieve all the information it can about the STB using the query libraries previously described. Referring to the interactive display would reflect either that the SNR is low due to ingress or that the tuner level is out of range. In addition the uncorrected blocks will show an increasing number as the STB continues to lose information. These LVPs would be displayed with a red or yellow background depending upon the severity of the issue. In this scenario the CST determines the need for a field technician and sets up a trouble call using the TC line provided.

Another subscriber calls to report problems with VOD. Again the CST enters the MAC address and receives an interactive page as illustrated in . The CST reviews the signal levels and operational parameters of the STB. If the customer has credit on his or her account and is authorized for VOD the CST then drills into the VOD Errors LVPs to determine what error conditions have occurred. Each error condition that has occurred in the last month for the STB in question is displayed in these LVPs. The errors also list what titles were attempted along with the VOD network environment at the time of the attempt. Using this sub section the CST determines if the issue is unique to the STB or if it needs to be given to the VOD group for further work.

One of the benefits of using the STB checker client of the present invention is that it establishes a standardized troubleshooting methodology by insuring that each CST has the same information available to diagnose issues in the same format. This allows for directed training at issues and resolutions which was not possible before. Prior to the invention of the STB checker client each CST was responsible for walking the customer through accessing the diagnostic pages on the STB. This was complicated by the fact that the diagnostic pages report a copious amount of information much of which is outside the scope of the CST s training. Additionally accessing the diagnostic pages required a complex combination of keys to be entered on the STB by the subscriber a fact that frustrated customers and CST s alike.

Another aspect of the present invention is the use of error data relating to failed STBs to determine whether data indicative of the status and performance of the STBs collected over time reflect a trend that may be used to develop preventive measures. By way of illustration and not as a limitation status and performance data may be without limitation related to an STB manufacturer a model a model release an operating system type and version and an application type and version. Mean time between failure data can also be compiled. Collection and trending of these data may without limitation permit STBs to be replaced or upgraded before a failure occurs. Alternatively trending data may be used to make purchasing decisions to improve quality performance and reliability.

A system and method for evaluating the operational status of an STB in a cable network have been described. It will be understood by those skilled in the art that the present invention may be embodied in other specific forms without departing from the scope of the invention disclosed and that the examples and embodiments described herein are in all respects illustrative and not restrictive. Those skilled in the art of the present invention will recognize that other embodiments using the concepts described herein are also possible. Further any reference to claim elements in the singular for example using the articles a an or the is not to be construed as limiting the element to the singular. Moreover a reference to a specific time time interval and instantiation of scripts or code segments is in all respects illustrative and not limiting.

