---

title: Molecular constructs and uses thereof in ribosomal translational events
abstract: Stalled ribosome:nascent molecule of interest complexes and methods of using same are provided. Plasmids, particularly DNA plasmids, comprising a stall segment are also disclosed. The methods provide for the facile and stable formation of stalled ribosome:nascent molecule of interest complexes that may be used to examine protein synthesis and protein conformational events, as well as in the creation of desired ribosomal displays. Cells transformed with these plasmids are also provided, and include both eukaryotic and prokaryotic transformed cells. Stall elements that provide for ribosomal stalling of eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosomes are also disclosed. Various therapeutic and clinical applications of these methods are also provided and used in diseases associated with defects in protein accumulation in vivo.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09006393&OS=09006393&RS=09006393
owner: 
number: 09006393
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050826
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. provisional application No. 60 604 459 filed Aug. 26 2004 which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.

The United States Government owns rights in the present invention as research relevant to the development of the invention was supported by United States federal funds from the National Science Foundation Contract Grant Number MCB 0237945.

The instant application contains a Sequence Listing which has been submitted in ASCII format via EFS Web and is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Said ASCII copy created on Sep. 2 2011 is named 34341420.txt and is 10 868 bytes in size.

The present invention relates generally to the field of genetic molecular tools particularly those molecular tools that may directly or indirectly direct translation and the activity of ribosomes. The invention also relates to the field of pharmacologically active molecule screening methods as genetic molecular tools are provided that are used in a variety of screening methods.

Co translational protein folding and maturation are often studied in cell free translation mixtures using stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes produced by translating truncated mRNA. This approach has at least two important limitations i it can be technically challenging and ii it only works in vitro where the concentrations of cellular components are different from concentrations in vivo.

Newly synthesized polypeptide chains first pass through the ribosomal exit tunnel which spans 100 between the peptidyl transferase site and the surface of the ribosome . The tunnel protects 30 40 aa of the nascent chain from contact with other cellular components and restricts the accessible conformational space. As the nascent chain lengthens its N terminus emerges into the cytosol. At this point the chain has access to additional conformational space and may also interact with other cellular components.

The rate of nascent chain synthesis 20 aa sec in is considerably slower than many folding events some of which occur on a microsecond timescale. The difference between these rates implies that protein folding can begin during chain synthesis and co translational folding has been detected experimentally. Co translational folding therefore represents a fundamentally different starting ensemble for folding than dilution of a full length chain out of a chemical denaturant and conformations populated by nascent chains in vivo can be populated quite differently or not at all during refolding in vitro. For a given protein co translational folding might therefore modify the dominant folding pathway potentially influencing aggregation propensity. Yet while recent studies have made some progress in tracking and observing the folding of proteins within intact cells the earliest steps of folding in vivo while chain synthesis is underway remain unclear in part because of a lack of tractable methods to dissect these early folding steps.

Translation mixtures and intact cells include ribosomes bearing nascent chains of all lengths. This heterogeneity means there currently are no biophysical techniques available to assess nascent chain conformation as translation occurs. Uncoupling chain elongation and folding typically by increasing the population of ribosomes bearing nascent chains of a discrete length can however provide snapshots of nascent chain conformations during synthesis.

Producing stalled ribosomes bearing nascent chains of a uniform length remains a substantial technical hurdle for measuring ribosome bound nascent chain conformations. Current methods to create stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes are technically quite challenging particularly for longer nascent chain lengths.

The above and other limitations in the art associated with ribosome nascent chain manipulation currently limit the efficiency and potential powerful applications for using ribosomes in various biophysical analytical techniques including ribosome display. A need continues to exist in the art for more reliable and reproducible techniques for capturing and monitoring translational events involved in the genesis of proteins as well as protein conformation events related thereto.

The present invention is directed to overcoming the above mentioned and other challenges related to the use of ribosomes and molecular constructs that may be created and analyzed using them in examining protein synthesis in vitro and in vivo.

The present invention is exemplified in a number of implementations and applications some of which are summarized below.

In some aspects a stall element suitable for use in a molecular construct with a ribosome is provided. The stall element when used as part of the constructs and methods described herein will cause translation to stall at an amino acid such as the C terminal proline P residue the stall point in or near the sequence when inserted into a gene of interest.

In some embodiments the stall element is described as comprising a stall sequence having a structure as defined in Formula I F X1 WI X2 GIRAGP SEQ ID NO 1 wherein X1 X2 or both X1 and X2 comprise 1 or more amino acid residue. In some embodiments X1 comprises 1 to 4 amino acid residues. In some embodiments X2 comprises 1 to 4 amino acid residues. In other embodiments X1 is an amino acid sequence other than the sequence STPV SEQ ID NO 2 where X2 is a sequence SQAQ SEQ ID NO 3 . In other embodiments X2 is other than a sequence SQAQ SEQ ID NO 3 where X1 is STPV SEQ ID NO 2 . In some embodiments the stall element comprises a sequence of 17 or more amino acid residues.

In other embodiments the stall element comprises a molecular tag. In some embodiments the molecular tag is a histidine tag or a cMyc tag or a FLAG tag for antibody binding for example. In some of these embodiments the tag is a histidine tag and the histidine tag is embedded within the stall sequence. In some of these embodiments X1 is 1 to 4 histidine residues where X2 is 1 to 3 histidine residues. In other embodiments X1 is 1 to 3 histidine residues where X2 is 1 to 4 histidine residues. In other embodiments both X1 and X2 are 1 to 3 histidine residues. In other embodiments X2 is 1 to 4 histidine residues and X1 is a sequence other than 1 to 4 histidine residues. In other embodiments the histidine tag comprises a sequence including histidine residues attached to the C terminus of the stall element.

In a particular embodiment X1 includes 1 to 3 histidine residues and X2 includes 1 to 4 histidine residues. In one such embodiment the stall element comprises a sequence 

The presence of histidine H residues within the stall element increases the affinity of the stall element for an affinity separation material such as to a metal species on a separation column. Hence any molecule that is complexed or attached to the stall element may be isolated using standard affinity based separation techniques such as via nickel affinity chromatography. In particular aspects the presence of the histidine residues in the stall element facilitates recovery of any desired nascent chain of interest from a reaction mixture resulting from a stalled translation event.

In some embodiments the histidine tag His tag of the stall element is flanked on either end by one or more restriction endonuclease sites. In some embodiments the His tag is flanked on each side by one or more such as five 5 unique restriction sites. The restriction sites located on either side of the His tag of some of the constructs described herein facilitate the insertion of the stall element sequence at any position of interest within a gene where translation stall is desired. For example in some embodiments it may be desirable to insert the stall element within a particular gene or within a chromosome or other desired sequence structure or construct.

In some embodiments the stall element is described as comprising a six 6 amino acid segment having an amino acid sequence modeled on a portion of a SecM sequence GIRAGP SEQ ID NO 6 . However any eukaryotic or prokaryotic amino acid sequence that is capable of stalling ribosome translation may be used in the model presented herein. Particular other stall elements may be modeled after eukaryotic sequences and elements such as for example gp48 CPA 1 arg 2 CGS 1 and others. Suitable stall sequences include those that are capable of arresting or inhibiting the native rate of ribosomal translation relative to the rate of ribosomal translation in the absence of a stall element.

The stall sequences of the invention are characterized by the ability to induce permanent or transient translational arrest of a ribosome at a selected discrete point on a nucleic acid sequence of interest. This feature permits the formation of large easily detectable quantities of ribosome associated nascent molecule chains of uniform and predictable size and length suitable for detailed biophysical analysis. In this regard compositions enriched for a particular desired species of stalled ribosome nascent molecule of interest complex are provided.

The stall element as described herein may be used in a variety of applications and incorporated into both recombinant plasmid borne genes and chromosomal gene s . Such applications may be used to knock down the expression of a particular gene or to regulate the appearance of a protein in a cell or animal.

In some embodiments the nascent molecule of interest may comprise a molecule such as a non natural e.g. polyglycine or natural polypeptide chain peptide protein . The protein or peptide may have any desired length of amino acids and in some embodiments may be described as a nascent chain having a length of from 1 to 900 or more amino acids. In some embodiments the nascent molecule comprises a protein or peptide having an amino acid length of 15 to 800 20 to 700 or 50 to 800 amino acid residues.

The stalled ribosome nascent molecule of interest complexes are relatively stable and remain intact for many hours. By way of example the stalled ribosome nascent molecule of interest constructs remain stable for at least 24 hours or more in vitro. Compositions that are enriched for particular species of stalled ribosome nascent molecule complexes are more easily subject to detailed biophysical analysis of particular nascent chain molecules of interest and are more easily purified from other cellular components such as by for example standard sucrose gradient centrifugation techniques.

The length size of the nascent molecule of interest as part of the complex may be manipulated to modulate the efficiency and or detectability of a desired species of stalled ribosome nascent chain complex. For example in some embodiments where the nascent molecule of interest comprises a relatively long length of amino acids such as 800 or more amino acid residues a generally lower detectable arrest will be observed. While not intending to be limited to any mechanism of action or theory it may be that drag produced by a very long nascent chain acts to disrupt the stabilizing interactions between a stall sequence and the ribosome tunnel during translation.

Shorter nascent chains such as 50 to 800 amino acid residues as part of the described stalled ribosome nascent molecule complex provide even more greatly improved stall efficiencies. An advantage of using this size range of nascent chain in vivo in a cell exists in that the presence of this size range of nascent chain molecules is not likely to be toxic to the cell. Furthermore most nascent molecules of interest also tend to fall within this size range.

In some embodiments 2 or more or even up to 50 60 or more of the entire cellular ribosomal pool may be present in the form of desired stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes employing the herein disclosed methods and stall elements. Even shorter nascent chains such as 15 to 40 amino acid residues in length are effective at arresting translation using the herein described stall element and methods again providing a steady state level of arrested ribosome nascent chain complexes of about 2 or more and up to 50 or more of an entire cellular ribosomal pool.

In some embodiments the stalled ribosome construct comprises a ribosome that is a eukaryotic archaea or prokaryotic ribosome such as an ribosome. Thus in some embodiments the constructs include stable ribosome nascent molecule of interest chain encoding a protein or peptide or non natural molecule such as polyglycine complexes on ribosomes from any organism. It is envisioned that the presently described methods and constructs may be used in the study and characterization of protein maturational processes that are specific to any particular organism or class of organism. These processes include by way of example the translocation of nascent chains into the endoplasmic reticulum ER including covalent post translational modifications to a nascent molecule such as to a polypeptide chain for example glycosylation .

In yet another aspect a plasmid such as a DNA plasmid is provided. In some embodiments the plasmid comprises a nucleic acid sequence encoding a nascent molecule of interest and a stall element as described herein. In some embodiments the plasmid is a DNA plasmid. The DNA plasmid is also described as suitable for use in the transformation of a cell so as to form a transformed cell. Translation by a ribosome of the nucleic acid sequence of the transformed cell will result in the stopping or stalling of the ribosome at the stall point on or near a stall element. By way of example a stall point in one embodiment of the stall element comprises a terminal proline P residue as depicted in Formula I. The result of ribosomal stalling is the formation of stable arrested ribosome nascent molecule of interest complexes. These complexes may be used in several different biophysical analytical methods useful in the identification and characterization of biologically and pharmacologically important molecules. Some of these applications are described herein.

In some embodiments the DNA plasmid having a nucleic acid sequence comprising a stall element as described herein also comprises a molecular tag. For example a molecular tag my comprise a histidine tag or embedded histidine residue and or sequence of 1 or more histidine residues. An advantage of the featured histidine tags and residues in the construct is that they facilitate the recovery of nascent molecules of interest chains .

In another embodiment a plasmid such as a DNA plasmid is provided that comprises a stall element as described herein and 1 or more unique restriction endonuclease sites located on either side i.e. flanking said stall element. More specifically in some embodiments 1 or more of the restriction endonuclease sites are located at a position 5 of the stall element and 1 or more of the restriction endonuclease sites are locate 3 of the stall element. In some embodiments these restriction endonuclease sites facilitate the targeted insertion of a nascent molecule of interest at a position in front of 5 the stall element. In some embodiments there are 2 unique restriction endonuclease sites located at a position 5 of the stall element and 1 unique restriction endonuclease site located at a position 3 of the stall element. In some embodiments the unique restriction endonuclease sites flanking the stall element are positioned in tight and or in close proximity to the stall element.

In some embodiments a DNA plasmid is provided that comprises a nascent chain of interest a stall element and a C terminal post stall element. In some embodiments the post stall C terminal element may comprise a degradation tag such as a sequence ANDENYALAA SEQ ID NO 7 or an aggregation prone sequence such as a human light chain antibody sequence or a wild type green fluorescent protein sequence . These C terminal post stall elements provide yet an additional advantage in that they reduce and or eliminate the accumulation of released nascent chains that escape binding at the ribosome in a reaction environment cell or extract and thereby reduce background readings and increase the accuracy and efficiency of subsequent molecular analysis.

In another aspect a method is provided comprising tracking and observing early translational events simultaneously with ribosome translation of a nascent peptide or protein chain in vitro or in vivo. In other aspects a method is provided for tracking and observing co translational multimerization dimmers etc. of a nascent molecule chain of interest.

In some embodiments the methods employ the use of a stall element comprising a stall sequence of Formula I F X1 WI X2 GIRAGP SEQ ID NO 1 wherein X1 X2 or both X1 and X2 are 1 to 4 amino acid residues. In some embodiments X1 of Formula I comprises an amino acid sequence STPV SEQ ID NO 2 X2 comprises an amino acid sequence SQAQ SEQ ID NO 3 or X1 comprises the amino acid sequence STPV SEQ ID NO 2 and X2 comprises the amino acid sequence SQAQ SEQ ID NO 3 .

In some embodiments the methods do not involve in vitro translation. In other embodiments the methods do not employ truncated mRNAs. Furthermore in some embodiments the methods described herein employ mRNA species that posses a stop codon unlike other techniques that employ truncated mRNA and or mRNA lacking a stop codon. The molecular constructs employed in the presently described method particularly the stall element and the stalled ribosome nascent chain complex enable a vastly improved approach for the analysis of translational events and for achieving targeted halting or stalling of translation in vivo. Another advantage of the constructs and methods described herein includes the ability to use them efficiently with both circular and linear DNA. The constructs and methods are advantageously suitable for use in translation halting or stalling both in vitro or in vivo in a cell .

In yet another aspect a method is provided comprising forming a stalled ribosome nascent molecule wherein the nascent molecule comprises a nascent chain sequence of interest having a uniform size and or length. Stalled ribosome nascent molecules may then be used in standard molecular analytical techniques known to those of skill in the art to provide information on protein peptide genesis folding maturation and related molecular events. As part of the method the stall element as defined in Formula I or II is used so as to provide a stall tag within the stalled ribosome nascent molecule of interest. Such provides a powerful molecular tool having a variety of analytical and clinical applications.

In another aspect a method of enhancing translational stalling in a cell is provided. For example this may be provided by expressing the stalled construct as described herein in an strain deficient for an endogenous mechanism involved in translational events. By way of example such may comprise an cell strain that is lacking ssrA also known as tmRNA . ssrA is the endogenous mechanism responsible for release of stalled ribosomes. One such deficient strain is CH113 Hayes C. S. et al. 2002 .

In another aspect a method is provided comprising providing a ribosomal display. In some embodiments the method comprises preparing a tagged library of candidate mRNAs having a stall element from a DNA library. Then translating the candidate tagged pool of mRNAs to provide a pool of stalled ribosome mRNA complexes the mRNAs encoding a library of nascent chains of interest. The pool of stalled ribosome mRNA complexes may then be translated so as to yield a pool of ribosome nacent chain complexes. In this manner a ribosomal display of a desired nascent chain of interest protein peptide is created. These translated complexes may then be screened with a selective agent having affinity for the nascent chain so as to provide a selected pool of ribosome bound nascent chains of interest.

Because the mRNA encoding the nascent chain of interest also includes a stall element for example a stall element of Formula I or Formula II as defined herein these selected mRNA species may be efficiently processed to obtain the corresponding DNA product. This may be accomplished using a primer that binds specifically to the stall sequence. Using a standard reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction RT PCR a pool of selected mRNAs freed away from ribosome may be processed to produce a corresponding pool of DNA. These DNA may then be sequenced for any desired further applications or study e.g. sequence alignment analysis .

In yet another aspect a method comprising transforming cells in vivo with a plasmid construct is provided. In some embodiments the method comprises transforming cells with a DNA plasmid having a nascent chain of interest followed by a stall element for example a stall element as described in Formula I or II to provide a pool of transformed cells having a tagged stall segment nascent molecule of interest. This pool of transformed cells may then be treated to induce expression of the nascent molecule of interest. From this a pool of stalled ribosome nascent molecule constructs within the cell may be provided.

In some embodiments of the method the pool of transformed cells prepared as above may be lysed and the pool of stalled ribosome nascent molecule constructs selected isolated and the corresponding selected mRNA stall tagged sequences reverse transcribed to provide identifiable DNA sequences.

It is expected that the in vivo cell applications of the methods disclosed herein find particular applicability with nascent chain molecules having a length of from about 50 to about 800 amino acid residues. This size range of proteins peptides is not particularly toxic to the cell and permits a level of transcription in the cell sufficient for maintaining cell viability survival.

In yet another aspect a method comprising forming a ternary construct comprising an mRNA ribosome nascent molecule complex is provided. These ternary complexes are formed using the stall element having a Formula I F X1 WI X2 GIRAGP SEQ ID NO 1 wherein X1 X2 or both X1 and X2 are 1 to 4 amino acid residues.

A library of these ternary constructs for example a library containing mRNA corresponding to mutant protein sequences of interest may then be screened such as over a column of immobilized drug or other binding partner to provide a screened pool of ternary complexes. The screened pool of ternary complexes may then be treated with an agent to destabilize the ternary structure such as with EDTA and to isolate mRNAs. The collected mRNAs may then be subject to subsequent amplification such as by reverse transcription and PCR RT PCR .

In yet another aspect a eukaryotic stall element is provided. While many eukaryotic stall elements may be created and used according to the present invention one embodiment of the eukaryotic stall element may be modeled after a CGS1 stall element. In some embodiments the eukaryotic stall element comprises a stall sequence of Formula II X1 RR X3 X2 wherein X1 comprises 1 or more histidine residues 1 or more amino acid residues other than histidine or a combination thereof and where X2 comprises 1 or more histidine residues one or more amino acid residues other than histidine or a combination thereof and wherein said stall element is capable of stalling translation of a eukaryotic ribosome. In some embodiments X3 is other than a sequence NCSNIGVA SEQ ID NO 8 . Methods using these eukaryotic stall elements are also provided. In some embodiments X3 comprises 1 or more amino acid residues. In other embodiments X3 is other than a sequence NCSNIGVA SEQ ID NO 8 . In yet other embodiments X3 comprises 1 or more histidine residues. Methods using these and other eukaryotic stall elements in the practice of the invention are also provided.

The following conversion chart presents the one letter designation and three letter designation of the amino acids species used in the description of the various stall element sequences and associated modifications thereof presented.

The above summary of the present invention is not intended to describe each illustrated embodiment or every implementation of the present invention. The figures and the detailed description that follow more particularly describe these example embodiments.

Reference will now be made in detail to the exemplary embodiments of the invention examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. Wherever possible the same reference numbers will be used throughout the drawings to refer to the same or like parts.

The present invention provides stable molecular constructs and methods for tracking and inhibiting protein synthesis and selection through the manipulation of ribosome activity. These constructs and methods provide for the efficient and stable formation of large amounts of stable ribosome nascent molecule constructs. These constructs are characterized in some embodiments as comprising uniform sizes lengths of nascent molecules such as protein and or peptide chains of relatively the same length.

The constructs described herein are useful in a variety of different types of biophysical measurements such as NMR that require large quantities and concentrations of stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes. These large samples would be technically impossible or prohibitively expensive to produce using traditional ribosome stalling methods based on in vitro translation of truncated mRNAs. The stall element described herein such as a stall element modeled after a portion of the SecM stall sequence provides a directed method that facilitates the production of large quantities of stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes. The method may be used with conventional or other types of cultures to yield rapid results with high efficiency.

A particular advantage of the constructs and methods includes their amenability to analysis in both in vivo and in vitro systems. In particular the utility of the constructs methods in vivo enable the analysis of a wide range of nascent chain conformation and interaction studies including chain length and sequence dependent binding of molecular chaperones and or membrane targeting processes.

The constructs presented include nascent chain molecules having any desired length and produce stalled ribosome associated nascent chain complexes that accumulate to levels well within the detection limits of the assays presented. In addition comparable stall efficiencies were observed with constructs that contained nascent chains differing at least ten fold in length between the longest TFS and shortest C GFP49 nascent chains. This demonstrates yet another advantage of the stall element directed techniques described herein over previously available approaches as a more robust method suitable for studying a wide range of sizes of virtually any nascent molecule of interest.

Using some embodiments of the constructs a much higher percentage of stable stalled ribosomes may be produced in vivo compared to the number obtained using the same stall construct in vitro. For example with constructs having a nascent molecule structure length similar to T S the stall element directed stalling produces a much higher percentage of stalled ribosomes in vivo than in vitro 52 versus 23 . While in vitro translation lysates contain all factors necessary for translation they are nevertheless more dilute and lack the complexity of the cellular environment. The altered translation environment might explain the less efficient and more equivalent stalling that will be observed for some nascent molecules of interest such as those similar to the three tailspike nascent chain constructs examined here in vitro.

Where the definition of terms departs from the commonly used meaning of the term applicant intends to utilize the definitions provided herein unless specifically indicated otherwise.

It should be noted that the singular forms a an and the include reference to the plural unless the context as herein presented clearly indicates otherwise.

A stall sequence relates to a nucleic acid sequence or an amino acid sequence of eukaryotic and or prokaryotic origin that is capable of disrupting inhibiting or reducing the translational activity of a ribosome eukaryotic or prokaryotic .

 Nascent molecule relates to a non natural e.g. polyglycine or natural e.g. peptide protein molecule or a fusion product or combination of a natural molecule and a non natural molecule. The peptide or protein may comprise a fusion protein or peptide. The protein or peptide may also be described as a eukaryotic or prokaryotic protein or peptide or a hybrid molecule thereof. The nascent molecule may comprise a nucleic acid sequence mRNA RNA DNA an amino acid sequence corresponding to said nucleic acid sequence or a combination of an amino acid sequence nucleic acid sequence and a non natural molecule.

A stalled ribosome relates to a ribosome that is unable or that has otherwise been compromised so as to have a reduced activity for performing translation relative to a conventional ribosomal translational activity and rate. By way of example a stalled ribosome may comprise a ribosome that has a reduced activity for translation as a consequence of being bound to a nascent chain protein peptide or other molecule or as a consequence of having been aborted due to an encounter with a stalling element.

A unique restriction site relates to a restriction site on a nucleic acid sequence that is unique to a nucleic acid sequence and particularly relates to a unique restriction endonuclease site present in a nucleic acid sequence of a plasmid.

A composition that is described herein as being enriched for a particular component or ingredient is defined as a composition having a greater concentration of the identified component or ingredient relative to the amount concentration of that component in nature.

While the present invention is not necessarily limited to such applications various aspects of the invention may be appreciated through a discussion of various examples using this context.

The present example sets forth particular starting materials reagents and other materials as well as the methods used in the description of the present invention.

The SecM gene was obtained from plasmid pNH21. Preparation of plasmids encoding SecM stall fusion constructs is described in detail below.

To reduce the viscosity of the lysates 50 l of RNase free DNase Ambion and 50 l of 1 M MgSOwas added and the lysates incubated for 15 minutes on ice. The lysates were spun at maximum speed for 5 8 minutes in a microcentrifuge at room temperature until debris was well pelleted. Ribosomes were isolated from the cleared lysate in a procedure modified from Frydman et al. a 300 l volume of cleared lysate was layered on top of a 2.5 ml 35 sucrose cushion prepared in R buffer. Samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at a maximum RCF of 438 000 g in a Beckman Optima MAX E benchtop ultracentrifuge using a TLA 100.3 rotor. Ribosomes were rinsed with cold R buffer then resuspended in R buffer by gently swirling for 15 minutes at 4 C. For fluorescence measurements cell lysates were labeled with 19 M FlAsH dye synthesized according to ref. 24 on ice for 1 hour. The lysate supernatants were then loaded onto 10 30 linear sucrose gradients prepared in R buffer. The gradients were centrifuged at 4 C. in a Beckman Optima L 90K ultracentrifuge to reach an accumulated centrifugal effect value of 2.3 10rad sec. The gradients were then fractionated at 4 C. using an ISCO density gradient fractionation system Teledyne ISCO .

A T7 coupled transcription translation system for circular DNA EcoPro Novagen was used to generate stalled ribosome complexes in vitro. Reactions were prepared according to the manufacturer s directions using 5 f g of plasmid DNA supplemented with 1 f l of RNAsin Promega and 3 f g of the anti ssrA oligonucleotide

Reactions were incubated for 1 hour at 30 C. and quenched with 250 l of ice cold R buffer. Ribosomes were isolated by centrifugation through a sucrose cushion as described above.

Western blotting was performed according to a procedure modified from Speed M. A. et al 1997 . A detailed procedure is included in the description below.

The SecM gene was obtained from plasmid pNH21. A 285 nt segment corresponding to the 17 aa stall sequence plus additional downstream regions was amplified by PCR using primers 

These primers incorporated SacI and XhoI restriction sites in the 5 and 3 ends of the amplified sequence respectively. This PCR product was digested with SacI and XhoI all restriction endonucleases were from New England Biolabs and ligated into pET21b TSPK a pET21b based Novagen plasmid containing the tailspike gene cloned between the NdeI and SacI restriction sites also digested with SacI and XhoI. This vector pET21b TFSDE Tailspike Full length Stall Downstream Extension was used as a template for site directed mutagenesis Quik Change Kit Stratagene to introduce a new XhoI site immediately 3 of the stall sequence using the following primers 

This vector now contained two XhoI sites flanking the 3 SecM sequence not associated with translation stalling. Digestion with XhoI and subsequent religation of the vector eliminated the extraneous sequence resulting in the vector pET21b TFS encoding the entire tailspike sequence minus the stop codon Glu Leu from the SacI restriction site the 17 amino acids of the SecM stall sequence the XhoI restriction site encoding a Leu and Glu residue followed by the C terminal six histidine tag SEQ ID NO 16 and stop codon from the original pET21b vector. Other tailspike truncations Tf residues 1 556 and TS residues 1 229 tetraCys mutant sequences and GFP truncation C GFP49 were produced by PCR amplification of the desired sequence with a 5 primer incorporating the NdeI site and a 3 primer complementary to the desired truncation point and incorporating the SacI restriction site. The GFP template was plasmid pcDNA DEST53 Invitrogen . The PCR product was then ligated into the pET21b TFS vector digested with NdeI and SacI to replace the full length tailspike sequence TF with the appropriate alternative sequence.

Ribosomes were diluted in Laemmli sample buffer boiled for 10 minutes and the constituent proteins separated by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresisusing a 4 15 acrylamide gradient gel Bio Rad . Gel contents were transferred to a PVDF membrane using a Criterion Electroblotter Bio Rad under a constant voltage of 25 V for 16 hr at 4 C. Following transfer membranes were blocked in TBST buffer 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 150 mM NaCl 0.5 Tween 20 containing 5 powdered dry milk PDM for 50 minutes while rocking at room temperature. Membranes were incubated for 50 minutes with a primary antibody cocktail consisting of the anti tailspike monoclonal antibodies 70 and 92in 30 ml TBST 2 PDM. The blot was then washed twice with TBST for 5 minutes.

A secondary antibody solution containing a 1 20 000 dilution of goat anti mouse IgG alkaline phosphatase conjugate Southern Biotechnologies in TBST supplemented with 2 PDM was incubated with the blot for 30 minutes while rocking. The blot was again washed twice with TBST for 5 minutes. Finally color was developed by adding an alkaline phosphate substrate solution containing 66 l nitro blue tetrazolium Promega and 35 l 5 bromo 4 chloro 3 indolyl phosphate Promega in 10 ml AP buffer 100 mM Tris pH 9.5 100 mM NaCl 5 mM MgCl . The color development step proceeded for 10 20 minutes. Blots were scanned and band densities quantified using ImageJ software for MacOS X NIH http rsb.info.nih.gov ij .

The Lumio Green Detection Kit Invitrogen was used to visualize the C GFP49 nascent chain in a denaturing polyacrylamide gel. Sample preparation and visualization were performed according to the manufacturer s protocol. Briefly resuspended ribosomes were mixed with Lumio gel sample buffer and labeled by mixing with 20 M FlAsH. This was followed by incubation at 70 C. for 10 min. The samples were cooled to room temperature mixed with the in gel detection enhancer incubated 5 min at room temperature and the constituent proteins separated by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresisusing a 14 acrylamide gel Bio Rad . Bands were visualized using a UV transilluminator equipped with a digital camera Kodak . The gel image was digitized using an ethidium bromide filter with a 10 second exposure.

Sucrose gradient fractions were diluted 1 5 in R buffer and fluorescence excitation and emission spectra were measured using a PTI QM 6 fluorescence spectrometer. Fluorescence emission was scanned from 520 600 nm with a constant excitation wavelength of 505 nm. Excitation and emission slit widths were 5 nm. Samples were measured in quartz cuvettes and a circulating water bath was used to maintain the temperature at 25 C. The fluorescence intensity at the wavelength of maximum emission 528 nm was recorded for each fraction.

A dilution series of ribosomes bearing TFS T S or TSS nascent chains was prepared and the binding of mAb 236 was measured using the competition ELISA test. Concentrations of nascent chains were determined as described for calculations of stalling efficiency see Example 6 paragraph 0094 . mAb 236 binding to native tailspike trimer was also determined as described previously. Data were fit by nonlinear regression to the equation 

To exploit the SecM 17 aa stall sequence as a general tool to create stalled ribosome complexes bearing nascent chains of any sequence in vivo three modified expression plasmids were created to insert the SecM stall sequence at three different places in the sequence of phage P22 tailspike also see Example 1 .

Tailspike is a homotrimeric parallel helix protein previously shown to form some native like structure while nascent chains are still attached to the ribosome. The longest tailspike nascent chain construct TFS was designed so that the almost all of the monomer would be exposed from the ribosome with only the C terminal 20 aa occluded in the ribosomal exit tunnel. The mid length T S and shortest TSS nascent chain constructs were designed to expose the entire helix domain or the first three rungs of the helix domain respectively outside of the ribosome tunnel.

To ensure that the truncated tailspike bands observed did not arise from chains released from the ribosome a lysate from cells transformed with the empty vector was spiked with purified native tailspike and the ribosomes isolated as before. No tailspike was detectable by western blotting in the resuspended ribosomes indicating that released TFS T S or TSS chains which are all smaller than native tailspike were unlikely to sediment.

SecM directed production of stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes was also measured in commercial coupled transcription translation lysates each programmed with a plasmid encoding one of the three tailspike SecM stall fusions. In all reactions an oligonucleotide complimentary to the ssrA RNA sequence was included to suppress the release of stalled nascent chains. Ribosomes were isolated and analyzed as described above. As with in vivo translation each of the tailspike nascent chain lengths was detectable by western blotting with minimal background from other tailspike translation products .

SecM directed translation stalling was also examined using a sequence CGFP49 which consists of the tetraCys FlAsH binding motif CCPGCC SEQ ID NO 10 followed by the Nterminal portion of green fluorescent protein GFP residues 1 64 and the SecM stall sequence . The biarsenical fluorescein derivative FlAsH binds specifically to this optimized tetraCys motif20 and upon binding FlAsH fluorescence emission intensity increases dramatically.

Stalled C GFP49 was detected by fluorescence emission after denaturing gel electrophoresis of ribosomes prepared from cultures as were bands corresponding to two larger species 23 and 27 kDa . The 23 kDa band was present in both the empty vector control and C GPF49 lanes and is most likely SlyD an endogenous metal binding protein with high affinity for the FlAsH dye. The 27 kDa band may represent C GFP49 still attached to tRNA or multimeric C GFP49 nascent chains. Multimerization of C GFP49 chains at the tetra Cys motif via disulfide bond formation is known to occur during sample processing. Nevertheless the major band is the expected 9.4 kDa monomeric C GFP49.

To further verify that tailspike nascent chains were ribosome associated a lysate from expressing T S was separated on a 10 30 sucrose gradient . An intense band at 60 kDa corresponding to released T S was detected in top gradient fractions. Some level of released chains was expected given the relatively long 30 minute induction time. The T S band decreased in intensity until 70S fractions where the intensity increased sharply. A band at 80 kDa also appeared in 70S fractions and may represent T S nascent chains still attached to tRNA. The 47 kDa band present in fractions 4 12 is most likely the result of proteolytic degradation of released T S.

To demonstrate the efficiency of SecM directed stalling in vivo and in vitro the percentage of ribosomes bearing a stalled nascent chain using the constructs described herein was calculated. The amount of stalled tailspike nascent chain detected by western blotting was determined by comparison with a purified tailspike dilution series and the total concentration of ribosomes was determined using the relationship 1 Aunit 23 pmol 70S ribosomes.

In general stalling was even more efficient in vivo than in vitro. Stalled ribosomes represented between 13 and 52 of the total ribosome pool depending on the stall construct used.

As an alternative method to detect nascent chains on stalled ribosomes the tetraCys FlAsH binding motif was introduced into the tailspike sequence replacing residues 102 107 at the proteolytically labile junction between the N terminal domain and the central helix domain producing constructs C TFS C T S and C TSS . Each lysate was labeled with FlAsH and stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes were prepared by centrifuging cell lysate supernatants through sucrose density gradients. A fluorescence emission maximum was observed at 528 nm for all fractions as previously described for FlAsH. Fluorescence emission intensity was maximal in top gradient fractions corresponding to excess free FlAsH and decreased along the gradient with the exception of an emission peak in 70S ribosome containing fractions . FlAsH labeled C GFP49 lysates were also separated on sucrose gradients and the fluorescence emission of gradient fractions was measured. As for stalled tailspike chains there was a distinct peak of FlAsH fluorescence in ribosome containing fractions .

The present example demonstrates the utility of the invention for providing a large number of stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes having a uniform nascent chain component in a cell in vivo .

One advantage of producing stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes in vivo is the ability to easily and inexpensively produce large amounts of stalled nascent chains for biophysical assays. For example a panel of anti tailspike monoclonal antibodies have been characterized that are sensitive to changes in tailspike conformation during in vitro refolding. One such antibody mAb 236 recognizes native trimeric tailspike with sub nanomolar affinity yet shows no affinity for early in vitro refolding intermediates. The mAb 236 binding epitope is located in the center of the tailspike helix domain completely contained within the sequence of the TFS and T S constructs.

To determine a dissociation constant K for the binding of mAb 236 to each of the tailspike nascent chain lengths serial dilutions of ribosomes bearing each construct were prepared and mAb 236 binding was measured using a competition ELISA test. The mAb 236 showed no affinity for the shortest construct TSS which lacks the mAb 236 epitope . However mAb 236 bound tightly to T S and TFS tailspike nascent chains K 6 4 and 3 1 nM respectively in contrast to the complete lack of mAb 236 binding to early tailspike in vitro refolding intermediates.

The present example demonstrates the utility of the invention for use in creating a ribosomal display. These ribosomal displays have many utilities including utility in the creation of a library of selectable mRNAs encoding proteins or peptides of interest such as an mRNA library encoding mutant proteins of interest. From these libraries mRNAs encoding a desired protein or peptide may be selected and sequenced to identify the corresponding DNA sequence using PCR based amplification. These and other applications will be appreciated from a reading of the following example.

Ribosome display of peptides and proteins for genetic selection was pioneered by Andreas Pl ckthun Univ. Zurich Switzerland . In Pl ckthun s approach a DNA library encoding mutated sequences of a protein of interest followed by a C terminal spacer is transcribed in a cell free system. This transcribed mRNA lacks a stop codon because the stop codon has been deleted from the DNA sequence i.e. there is no stop codon prior to the transcription termination point . The mRNA library is then translated again using a cell free system. Translation proceeds to the end of the mRNA then stalls because there is no i RNA to translate or ii stop codon to dissociate the ribosome.

The resulting ternary mRNA ribosome nascent protein complex is stable for up to 10 days and due to the C terminal spacer the translated protein is completely emerged from the ribosome exit tunnel and able to fold to an active conformation. The protein can then be used for screening for example by passing the library of mutant ternary complexes over a column of an immobilized drug or other binding partner. The ternary complexes that survive the screen are next destabilized by EDTA and the gene sequences of the mutants may be amplified by reverse transcription and PCR RT PCR . Additional rounds of PCR to produce a second generation ribosome display library can then begin. However these additional rounds of PCR are prone to error.

Pl ckthun has described approaches to improve the stability of the ternary complexes. Some examples of these include 

The approach works using the common translation systems from prokaryotic for example and eukaryotic for example yeast rabbit reticulocytes wheat germ sources.

Pl ckthun s approach requires mRNA transcription be performed as a separate reaction. This separate reaction step requires handling and stabilizing fragile mRNA pools. In contrast the cell free systems described here using stall element such as for example SecM directed ribosome stalling can be accomplished using coupled transcription translation lysates eliminating the need for a separate transcription reaction. Alternatively transcription and translation can be accomplished in vivo in a cell eliminating altogether extracellular exposure of the mRNA.

In addition Pl ckthun employs a system that uses an mRNA that lacks a stop codon as well as other 3 downstream regions. Because of this ribosome initiation is inefficient. Ph ckthun includes a downstream transcriptional termination site as opposed to other mechanisms that merely truncated an intact mRNA in an effort to remedy this deficiency. However efficiency is still not as improved as the approach provided here that does not employ a truncated mRNA and that does use an mRNA having a stop codon and naturally occurring 3 mRNA sequence.

The mRNAs of the present methods and compositions have a stop codon downstream of the stall element sequence and all other features of normal mRNA. These features among others contribute to an even further improvement in translational efficiency.

In an alternative aspect the method of the present invention may be practiced using a coupled transcription translation in vitro step or as a coupled transcription translation in vivo in a cell step. This presents an advantage over the technique described in Pl ckthun where transcription was carried out as a separate reaction.

By way of example a ribosome display in vivo may be provided by replacing the below described steps 1 and 2 with a coupled transcription translation in vivo step to create transformed cells using a construct including the stall element such as the stall elements described herein modeled after SecM inducing expression of the transformed cells and lysing the transformed cells to produce a pool of stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes.

Step 1. A library of DNA is transcribed by an in vitro transcription system to provide a pool of candidate mRNAs. This library may contain random or directed specific mutants or may be made from the cellular mRNA population cDNA library with all the sequences containing a 3 SecM sequence.

Result Transcription of the DNA library yields a pool of candidate mRNAs for the ribosome library that include a stall element sequence.

Step 2. The pool of candidate mRNAs are introduced into an in vitro translation system to provide a pool of stalled ribosome nascent chain molecule complexes.

Result The pool of candidate mRNAs are translated and yield a pool of ribosomes with a nascent chain attached. This chain is stalled at the SecM sequence with the target molecule e.g. protein exposed outside the ribosomal tunnel.

Step 3. The pool of stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes are exposed to a selective agent substrate binding protein or antibody having affinity for the nascent chain of interest.

Result The stalled ribosomes with bound nascent chain having the phenotypic property desired i.e. binding to a substrate can be isolated from the general population of ribosomes to provide a selected pool of stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes having a desired nascent chain of interest. This may be achieved using a resin or affinity column that contains a substrate binding protein or antibody specific for the nascent chain of interest. Ribosomes with no nascent chains or undesired nascent chains are eluted away from the ribosomes with target nascent chains.

The following additional steps may be performed in order to obtain selected DNA sequences corresponding to the subject selected mRNAs of the stalled ribosome complexes.

Step 4. Selected pool of stalled ribosome nascent chain of interest complexes are denatured with mild detergent or heat and or EDTA.

Result The ribosomes are denatured and the selected mRNAs having a stall tag SecM sequence are freed from the complex.

Result Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction RT PCR produces a DNA product using a primer that binds specifically to the 3 end of the selected mRNA stall tag .

A limitation to Pl ckthun style ribosome display is the repetitive linker sequence immediately 3 to the sequence of interest it is very difficult to design a specific primer binding site in this region. In contrast the stall tag for example a stall tag having a sequence modeled after SecM sequence at the end of the selected mRNA provides a specific primer binding site.

Result The DNA sequences prepared from the targeted mRNAs are obtained and compared to define DNA sequences and to identify important residues contained therein.

In contrast to standard ribosome display stall element SecM mediated ribosome display enables the creation of screenable mRNA libraries containing a 3 conserved element for example a stall element having a sequence modeled after the stall SecM sequence that is particularly valuable for RT PCR and sequencing.

While the absence of transformation into cells is sometimes regarded as an advantage of Pl ckthun style ribosome display this may be due to the inability to produce stalled chains in vivo because these techniques employ mRNAs lacking a stop codon. Since the use of a stall element and mRNA species having a stop codon can be efficiently used with the presented methods in vivo transformation of cells is an available option for ribosomal display.

In vivo the cellular machinery including but not limited to molecular chaperones that assist folding that increase protein folding or modify nascent chains is present to participate and to provide previously unavailable and unknown results. Furthermore for nascent chains that result in poor yields of folded product while tethered the significantly higher number of ribosomes in vivo vs. in vitro may be expected to increase the population of properly folded chains to identify novel sequences.

The present example demonstrates the utility of the present invention for providing a eukaryotic stall element and for its use in the creation of eukaryotic stalled ribosome nascent chain complexes.

The SecM stall sequence is found only in eubacteria for example and . No BLAST hits were found to other proteins. The SecM stall sequence is near the C terminus of SecM and upon translation of the stall sequence about 150 aa of SecM are outside the ribosome tunnel. While eukaryotic systems do not use an endogenous SecM related stalling mechanism there are several other mechanisms known to stall translation in eukaryotes and prokaryotes.

One eukaryotic downstream stall element is CGS1. This stall element has a native sequence of RRNCSNIGVAQ SEQ ID NO 17 . In the present example a eukaryotic stall element modeled after this sequence is presented. It is envisioned that one such construct may comprise a sequence of Formula II X1 RR X3 Q X2 wherein X1 X2 or both X1 and X2 comprise 1 or more histidine residues. X1 may comprise an amino acid residue such as A alanine . X2 may comprise an amino acid residue such as I isoleucine . X3 may comprise one or more amino acid residues other than the sequence NCSNIGVA SEQ ID NO 8 

In at least one case using arg 2 effective ribosome stalling was observed using the arg 2 stall sequence moved to a C terminal downstream position.

Some additional potential eukaryotic ribosome stall elements may be fashioned using the identified elements and sequences presented below such as for example gp48 CPA 1 and arg 2. Mutations of the residues in bold reduce eliminate ribosome stalling. In creating a potential eukaryotic stall element it is important to consider that these bolded residues may not be the only residues involved in stalling.

Using arg 2 others have shown that stalling is effective using a variety of eukaryotic but not prokaryotic translation systems. This suggests the lining of the ribosome exit tunnels on prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribosomes might be different enough to require different sequences for effective stalling. The arg 2 also requires arginine depletion for effective stalling. These and other modifications may be made in adapting the herein described ribosome stalling approaches to use in a eukaryotic system cell and or extract .

The gene origin of this sequence is a mammalian virus The ribosome translates through uORF2 until the uORF2 peptide attached to the cognate tRNAPro for the terminal proline codon CCU is positioned in the ribosomal P site while the stop codon UAA is in the A site. At this point eRF1 enters the ribosomal A site recognizes the stop codon and binds to the ribosome. During the termination reaction the glycines of the eRF1 GGQ motif and the two terminal prolines of uORF2 interact possibly through the peptidyltransferase to form an intermediate that stabilizes the peptidyl tRNA bond. This stabilization contributes to prolonged ribosomal stalling which in turn blocks ribosomes from scanning to the downstream UL4 cistron See Janzen et al. 2002 .

The gene origin of this sequence is fungi The nascent uORF encoded peptide acts on its translating ribosome and prevents release at the termination codon for the uORF.

This stalled ribosome sets up a blockade to ribosome scanning preventing initiation of translation of downstream coding sequence See Lovett et al. 1996 Morris et al. 2000 .

The gene origin of this sequence is fungi. arg 2 is also called arginine attenuator peptide AAP . It uses Arg as a co activator. Stalling at both the N terminal and internal positions has been reported hence some similarities with SecM mechanism . It also works in plants and animal systems See Fang et al. 2004 Lovett et al. 1996 and Morris et al. 2000 .

The gene origin of this sequence is a plant. Translation elongation arrest is at the Ser 94 codon located immediately downstream of the MTO1 region. This translation arrest precedes the formation of a degradation intermediate of CGS1 mRNA which has its 5 end points near the 5 edge of the stalled ribosome. The position of ribosome stalling also suggests that the MTO1 region in nascent peptide resides in the ribosomal exit tunnel when translation elongation is temporarily arrested.

The addition of S adenosyl L methionime is required for MTO1 stalling. In addition to the MTO1 region amino acid sequence downstream Trp 93 is also important for the AdoMet induced translation arrest. This demonstrates nascent peptide mediated translation elongation arrest coupled with mRNA degradation in eukaryotes. Furthermore this data suggest that the ribosome stalls at the step of translocation rather than at the step of peptidyl transfer.

The MTO1 region is conserved among CGS sequences of higher plants but cannot be found elsewhere in the public databases See Ominato et al. 2002 and Onouchi et al. 2005 .

There is a growing realization that many human diseases are caused by protein folding defects in vivo. In addition there is a growing interest in producing a wider range of proteins for therapeutic purposes. The present example defines the utility of the present invention for providing a useful mechanism for use in identifying and or treating human diseases and for screening identifying potentially potent new pharmaceutical products.

An essential component of effective antibiotics is the ability to exploit and destroy an essential bacterial process or mechanism that is not used by eukaryotic cells. For example many common antibiotics penicillin etc. are small organic molecules that bind to the proteins that are responsible for synthesizing the rigid cell wall that is unique and essential to bacterial cells. From this perspective if the SecM stall sequence is effective at stalling ribosomes from bacterial cells but has no effect on eukaryotic cells then SecM mediated stalling could be adapted to stall bacterial ribosomes to such a large degree that there are not enough free unstalled ribosomes left to synthesize the proteins essential to bacterial cell viability.

Nakatogawa et al. 2002 report very short nascent chains bearing the SecM stall sequence basically those that start immediately with the stall sequence have a negative effect on bacterial cell viability. Given the disclosure provided here on the use of SecM modeled stall sequences for stalling prokaryotic ribosomes the SecM stall sequence may provide an effective antibiotic and or antibacterial agent.

SecM stall sequence or an alternative sequence for example a stall element having a sequence based on one of the eukaryotic sequences presented in Example 11 once demonstrated to be effective at stalling translation in eukaryotic cells can provide the potential for using SecM directed translation stalling in gene therapy applications. For example there are many diseases that arise due to the aberrant overproduction of a particular protein or proteins.

The stall element constructs may be used in gene therapy to introduce a stall sequence at the C terminus of such a protein reducing its accumulation. However this treatment would be most effective only if there were not several genes or other factors that led to the over accumulation of the causative protein. If there were only one gene responsible and gene therapy was an effective treatment it would be easier to use gene therapy to remedy a gene defect or activity responsible for the protein overproduction.

The present example is presented to describe those embodiments of the constructs that include a C terminal or an N terminal modification of the stall element. In some examples this C terminal modification comprises a degradation tag.

One well characterized degradation tag sequence in bacteria is ANDENYALAA SEQ ID NO 7 . This sequence is added by a mechanism called ssrA to the C terminus of nascent proteins targeted for degradation. Expressing a protein with this sequence already encoded at the C terminus rather than having it added by ssrA has been shown to trigger rapid degradation of the protein Hayes et al. 2002 .

In eukaryotes the primary focus for degradation is governed by a principle known as the N end rule meaning that the N terminal residues play a key role in determining how fast the protein will be ubiquitinated a covalent modification that targets a protein for degradation. Different N terminal residues result in faster degradation in different species yeast vs. human etc. . In general the most effective N end rule sequence is RK . The N rule can also be used to control protein half life in bacteria.

Degradation can be further enhanced by placing an unstructured floppy sequence between the N end rule amino acids and the start of the true structured protein. The floppy sequence will make it easier for the proteasome the protease that degrades cellular proteins to latch onto the protein and initiate degradation.

In eukaryotic systems many proteins are sent to other organelles ER golgi etc. and then pumped back into the cytoplasm for degradation by the proteosome. There are post translationally added sequences KDEL SEQ ID NO 22 for example which when added to the C terminus of a protein will keep a Golgi destined protein in the ER for longer than usual usually because the protein is taking longer than usual to fold correctly.

It is believed that KDEL SEQ ID NO 22 tag will also decrease the half life of ER proteins again the tag serves as a quality control mechanism.

