---

title: Rapid two-step synthesis of anti-coagulants
abstract: The present invention provides methods for the production of N-deacetylate N-sulfate derivatives of non-sulfated N-acetyl heparosan (HS) polysaccharides, compounds thus obtained and compositions comprising same. This invention also provides applications of N-deacetylate N-sulfate derivatives of non-sulfated N-acetyl heparosan (HS) polysaccharides, and compositions comprising same, for use in controlling coagulation and treating thrombosis.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08450297&OS=08450297&RS=08450297
owner: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
number: 08450297
owner_city: Cambridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050816
---
This application is a continuation of U.S. application Ser. No. 10 986 058 filed on Nov. 12 2004 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 655 445 which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 601 636 filed on Aug. 16 2004 and are hereby incorporated by reference in their entirety.

This invention was made in whole or in part with government support under grant numbers HL63609 and HL66105 awarded by the National Institute of Health. The government may have certain rights in the invention.

This invention provides Heparin derived anti coagulants and methods for synthesizing Heparin derived anticoagulants. Further this invention provides methods for a rapid two step synthesis process for heparin derived anticoagulants having diminished PF4 binding capacity and methods of use thereof.

Heparin a strongly acidic linear sulfated polysaccharide anti coagulant is used in the prevention and treatment of thrombosis. Heparin was first isolated from the liver from which it derives its name 1 . Heparin like polysaccharides are shown to interact with numerous proteins and orchestrate many different biologic functions 2 . A unique penta saccharide domain present within heparin was found to bind to Antithrombin III ATIII in a highly specific manner to induce a conformational change that is sufficient to promote rapid inhibition of blood coagulation 3 4 . Sinay and coworkers pioneered the original chemical synthesis of the ATIII binding pentasaccharide and analogs 5 6 .

Heparin induced thrombocytopenia HIT is an immunologic disorder associated with heparin treatment 7 . HIT paradoxically increases thrombosis which occurs in about 30 of the recognized HIT cases and is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients treated with heparin. It has been shown that HIT is induced by antibodies directed against a PF4 heparin complex. The complex formation requires a 2 O sulfated iduronic acid residue 8 . Engineering new heparin like anticoagulants that are unable to form heparin PF4 complexes would be a major advance in anticoagulation therapy. There is also an increased concern for the potential spread of diseases of animal origin to humans such as bovine encephalopathy due to the use of animal derived heparin. The above mentioned potential side effects of animal derived heparin prompted the chemical synthesis of heparin based anticoagulants. Despite many advances made in chemical synthesis this approach is cumbersome and time consuming.

This invention provides in one embodiment Heparin derived anticoagulants and methods for the production of a polysaccharide molecule a compound or a composition comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharides. This invention also provides in another embodiment methods of use of N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharides and compositions comprising same for use in controlling coagulation and treating thrombosis.

In one embodiment the invention provides N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide. In one embodiment the invention provides a compound represented by the structure of Formula I.

In another embodiment the invention provides compositions comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I.

The invention provides in another embodiment a method for the preparation of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide derivatives represented by Formula I comprising the steps of a contacting a non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide with N deacetylase N sulfotransferase and glucuronosyl C 5 epimerase to generate an iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide b contacting the product of step a with 6 O sulfotransferase 6 OST and 3 O sulfotransferase 3 OST and c isolating the product of step b thereby yielding N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan.

In another embodiment the invention provides a method for the preparation of novel glycosaminoglycans comprising the steps of a contacting a non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide with the enzymes N deacetylase N sulfotransferase and glucuronosyl C 5 epimerase to generate an iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide b contacting the product of step a with the enzymes 6 O sulfotransferase 6 OST and 3 O sulfotransferase 3 OST and c isolating the product of step b thereby yielding N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan.

In another embodiment the invention provides a method for preventing or treating thrombosis in a subject comprising providing said subject with an effective amount of a compound or composition comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I.

In one embodiment the invention provides for a compound comprising an N deacetylate N sulfate derivative of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I.

As used herein the terms compound of Formula I or compound represented by the structure of Formula I are synonymous and refer to N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of the following formula 

In one embodiment the compound of Formula I has an acetyl group Ac at each position indicated by an R in the formula hereinabove. In another embodiment the compound has a sulfonate group SO at each position indicated by an R in the formula hereinabove. In another embodiment the compound has a Hydrogen H at each position indicated by an R in the formula hereinabove. In another embodiment the compound has mixed substitutions of Ac SO or H groups at positions indicated by an R in the formula hereinabove. It is to be understood that any substitutions of formula I achieved via the methods described herein with anti coagulant activity are to be considered as part of this invention. Such compounds may have additional therapeutic activity as well including antiviral activity.

In another embodiment n is an integer with a value of 50 250. In one embodiment n is an integer with a value of 1 1 000 or in another embodiment 1 100 or in another embodiment 1 50 or in another embodiment 1 25 or in another embodiment 1 15. In another embodiment n is an integer with a value of 100 1 000 000. In another embodiment n is an integer with a value of 100 100 000. In another embodiment n is an integer with a value of 100 1 000. In another embodiment n is an integer with a value of 1 000 1 000 000 or in another embodiment 1 000 100 000 or in another embodiment 1 000 50 000 or in another embodiment 1 000 25 000 or in another embodiment 1 000 10 000.

It is to be understood that reference to the compound of Formula I is meant to include any molecule with a sufficient percentage of atoms identical with that represented by the structure of Formula I. The compound may in one embodiment exhibit less molecular identity in terms of atomic correspondence yet exhibit functional homology for example in terms of the sulfonation or the absence of sulfonation at key positions. The term homology or correspondence as used herein is meant to represent identity as indicated or comparability indicating an ability to conform structurally or thereby perform functionally. Thus any molecule synthesized via the methods described herein wherein the product exhibits molecular identity or structural homology and or possesses anti coagulant activity is to be considered as part of this invention.

Homology and or comparability may be determined by methods well described in the art including immunoblot analysis HPLC Mass Spectroscopy functional assays disclosed herein demonstrating anti coagulant activity and others well known to those skilled in the art.

The term derivative as used herein is meant to encompass any molecule that is a product of the manipulation of an index compound via any of the steps comprising the rapid 2 step synthesis method disclosed herein. A derivative of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide therefore indicates that the index compound in this case the N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide is a starting material and following the rapid 2 step synthesis outlined herein the product is referred to as a derivative of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide.

In one embodiment the derivative will following the rapid 2 step synthesis outlined herein produce a compound represented by the structure of Formula I.

In one embodiment the N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide exhibit a mass spectrum comparable to that of .

In another embodiment the compound comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by Formula I comprises at least 1 tri sulfated disaccharide. The tri sulfated disaccharide may in one embodiment contain a 3 O sulfated glucosamine unit and as such represents another embodiment of the invention. The 3 O sulfated glucosamine unit may in one embodiment correspond to U GlcNS3S6S.

In another embodiment the compound of Formula I following enzymatic cleavage with heparitinases is characterized by the presence of a peak at m z 576.0 M 1H 1 by mass spectroscopy.

A compound comprising N sulfate derivatives of N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by Formula I was demonstrated herein via gel mobility shift assay to bind to anti thrombin III ATIII . In comparison to commercial heparin a greater percentage of the compound bound ATIII. Anticoagulant activity was further demonstrated via the heparin dependent factor Xa inhibition assay where the specific activity of the compound represented by Formula I was approximately 4 5 times that of commercial heparin. LC MS analysis demonstrated that the compound represented by Formula I contains multiple ATIII binding sites within the polymer indicative of a greater ability to inhibit factor Xa. 2 O sulfated iduronic acid residues found in heparin which are responsible for heparin binding to PF4 are absent in the compound represented by Formula I.

Coagulation is normally balanced by the fibrinolytic system which helps to restore normal blood flow. Activation of the coagulation cascade is regulated by several systems of natural anticoagulant proteins. The term anti coagulant as used herein refers to any molecule that prevents the formation of a clot.

Anti thrombin AT is known to neutralize the proteolytic activities of several clotting factors. Heparin exerts its anticoagulant effects by stimulating AT which ultimately results in AT irreversible binding to and inhibition of coagulation factors. Heparin is also responsible for HIT owing to its PF4 binding capacity. Anti coagulants which bind AT or otherwise suppress coagulation yet possess diminished PF4 binding capacity or otherwise diminish the likelihood of HIT phenomenon are highly desirable.

Methods for measuring the effect on coagulation and or the concentration in blood or plasma of direct or indirect inhibitors of activated coagulation factors include the assessment of inhibition of coagulation factors e.g. FIIa and FXa using chromogenic substrate analysis and so called clotting methods e.g. the aPIT assay activated partial thromboplastin time the ACT assay activated clotting time the TT assay thrombin time the ECT assay ecarin clotting time and the Heptest assay see U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 946 775 4 756 884 4 861 712 5 059 525 5 110 727 and 5 300 779 and Thrombosis and Hemorrhage op. cit. and Kandrotas R. J. Heparin Pharmokinetics and Pharmacodynamics Clin. Pharmacokinet. vol. 22 1992 pages 359 374 .

Compounds represented by Formula I in the present invention will comprise in one embodiment at least 1 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides within a polymer chain. The derivatives may comprise between 1 10 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides within a 40 mer compound.

In another embodiment compounds represented by Formula I comprise 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides. In one embodiment the 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides correspond to U GlcNAc6S GlcA GlcNS3S6S. In another embodiment the 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides correspond to U GlcNAc6S GlcA GlcNS3S. In another embodiment the 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides correspond to U GlcNS6S GlcA GlcNS3S6S. In another embodiment the 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides are characterized by the presence of a peak at m z 517.0 M 2H 2 by mass spectroscopy. In another embodiment the 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides are characterized by the presence of a peak at m z 477.1 4 2H 2 by mass spectroscopy. In another embodiment the 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides are characterized by a peak at m z 536.0 M 2H 2 by mass spectroscopy.

In another embodiment the compound of Formula I is characterized by the presence of a peak at m z 517.0 N4 2H 2 or 477.1 M 2H 2 or 536.0 M 2H 2 by mass spectroscopy. In another embodiment N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide comprise any combination of the 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides herein described.

In another embodiment the invention provides compositions comprising the compound of Formula I. Such compositions and method of administration of same can vary based on the particular application which is further discussed hereinbelow.

The compounds of the present invention according to another aspect of the invention can be synthesized via a rapid two step enzymatic process as exemplified herein. The NDST2 enzyme isoform was utilized to selectively N deacetylate and N sulfate glucosamine units of the N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide. Deacetylation and N sulfation was carried out in the presence of Heparan Sulfate C 5 epimerase which generated the iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide Formula II . NDST2 and C5 epimerase activities were coupled in order to prepare in a single step N sulfated polysaccharide Formula H containing both glucuronic and iduronic acid without 2 O sulfation.

The final step in the synthesis was catalyzed by combined activity of 6 O sulfotransferase 6 OST and 3 O sulfotransferase 3 OST . 6 O sulfation was coupled with 3 O sulfation to produce the compound represented by the structure of Formula I. Coupling of 6 O sulfation and 3 O sulfation shortened the time required for total synthesis.

In one embodiment there is provided a method for the preparation of N sulfated N deacetylated derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide derivatives represented by the structure of Formula I comprising the steps of contacting a non sulfated N acetyl heparosan polysaccharide with the enzymes N deacetylase N sulfotransferase and glucuronosyl C 5 epimerase to generate an iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide contacting the iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide with the enzymes 6 O sulfotransferase 6 OST and 3 O sulfotransferase 3 OST and isolating the product which yields an N deacetylate N sulfate derivative of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan corresponding to or homologous to Formula I.

In one embodiment the glucuronosyl C 5 epimerase utilized for the synthesis may be a recombinant glucuronosyl C5 epimerase a glucuronosyl C5 epimerase isolated from murine mastocytomas or a glucuronosyl C5 epimerase extracted from bovine liver.

In another embodiment the N deacetylase N sulfotransferase utilized for the synthesis may be a recombinant N deacetylase N sulfotransferase. The recombinant enzymes may be produced in insect cells in yeast or in bacterial cells via methods well known to one skilled in the art. In another embodiment the enzymes may be isolated from any animal cell wherein the enzyme is naturally expressed or from human cells.

In another embodiment the 6 O sulfotransferase utilized for the synthesis may be a recombinant enzyme. The recombinant enzymes may be produced in insect cells in yeast or in bacterial cells via methods well known to one skilled in the art. In another embodiment the enzymes may be isolated from any animal cell wherein the enzyme is naturally expressed or from human cells. In one embodiment the 6 O sulfotransferase utilized may be the 6 OST1 6 OST2 or 6 OST3 isoform. In another embodiment 6 OST2 may be 6 OST2a or 6 OST2b.

In another embodiment the 3 O sulfotransferase utilized for the synthesis may be a recombinant enzyme. The recombinant enzymes may be produced in insect cells in yeast or in bacterial cells via methods well known to one skilled in the art. In another embodiment the enzymes may be isolated from any animal cell wherein the enzyme is naturally expressed or from human cells. In one embodiment the 3 O sulfotransferase utilized may be the 3 OST1 isoform or in another embodiment the 3 OST5 isoform with resulting structures tetrasaccharides considered as part of the present invention.

In one embodiment the non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide starting material is represented by the structure of Formula III.

According to this aspect of the invention and in another embodiment the Heparosan polysaccharide used as starting material may be a K5 polysaccharide which may be obtained by fermentation of wild or cloned K5 producing strains See for example M. Manzoni et al. Journal Bioactive Compatible Polymers 1996 11 301 311 or in WO 01 02597 Heparosan like polysaccharides may also be obtained from Pasturella multocida as described DeAngelis P L et al. Carbohydrate Research. 2002 337 17 1547 52 . In another embodiment the starting material may comprise Acharan Sulfate and may be isolated from an African giant snail and utilized accordingly.

In another embodiment the K5 starting materials may have a low molecular weight with a distribution of from about 1 500 to about 15 000 Daltons Da or in another embodiment from about 2000 to about 9 000 Da with a mean molecular weight of about 5 000 Da or in another embodiment a higher molecular weight particularly with a distribution from about 10 000 to about 50 000 Da or in another embodiment from about 20 000 to about 40 000 Da with a mean molecular weight of about 30 000 Da. In another embodiment K5 has a molecular weight distribution from about 1 500 to about 50 000 Da with a mean molecular weight of 20 000 25 000 Da.

In another embodiment the iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide synthesized from Formula III is represented by the structure of Formula II.

In another embodiment the first step of the reaction comprises reacting a non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide with sulfotransferase and epimerase such that the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration of 0.1 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration of 1 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration of 10 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration of 50 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration of 100 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration ranging from 0.1 1 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration ranging from 1 10 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration ranging from 10 50 mM. In another embodiment the heparosan polysaccharide is at a final concentration ranging from 50 100 mM.

In another embodiment the reaction of is conducted in a solution comprising 50 mM MES pH 7.0 1 W V triton X 100 5 mM MgCl2 5 mM MnCl2 2.5 mM CaCl2 0.075 mg ml protamine chloride 1.5 mg ml BSA or 25 mM HEPES 40 mM CaCl2 pH 6.5 with or without the addition of p40. In another embodiment alternative divalent cations are utilized as is well known in the art. In another embodiment reaction conditions are carried out at a pH ranging from 5.5 7.5. In another embodiment O sulfonization is performed at a temperature between 30 and 40 C. for a time comprised of between 1 and 24 hours.

In another embodiment the synthesis is carried out in a range of 1 1 000 ml total volume. In one embodiment the reaction is carried out at a 2500 l total volume. According to this aspect of the invention the following components were added polysaccharide final concentration was 1 mM equivalent of unmodified disaccharide 1250 l of 2 buffer 50 ng of the expressed sulfotransferase or epimerase S 3 phosphoadenosine 5 phosphosulfate PAPS 1.0 10cpm or S PAPS final concentration of 20 M and the appropriate amount of water. It is to be understood that the amounts of the above components can be scaled up proportionately as well and as such represent additional embodiments of the invention.

The reaction mixture is in one embodiment incubated at 37 C. for 12 hours then diluted to 5 ml with DEAE wash buffer and purified on DEAE column. In another embodiment the reaction is stopped by heating the reaction mixture at 70 C. followed by centrifugation at 10 000 g for 3 minutes.

The products obtained via the synthesis method of the invention may be characterized by any number of methods well known to one skilled in the art. In one embodiment the products are characterized via proton and carbon NMR analysis. In another embodiment products may be analyzed by capillary HPLC ESI TOF MS via methods exemplified herein.

In another embodiment products derived from the syntheses outlined herein may be analyzed via biological assays which assess anti Xa aPTT HCII Anti IIa activity and affinity for ATIII.

In another embodiment the compound comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide generated by the methods disclosed comprise 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides which are resistant to cleavage by heparitinases as was evident in Example 3 herein. In another embodiment the compounds generated via the methods disclosed herein possess at least 4 times greater anti coagulant activity than that of heparin as measured by factor Xa assays. In another embodiment the compounds generated via the methods disclosed herein possess diminished PF4 binding capacity as compared to heparin.

In another embodiment the molecular weight of the products of the synthesis can be tailored at any stage by standard chemical or enzymatic cleavage techniques which have been utilized in similar fashion to produce low molecular weight heparin thereby producing additional low molecular weight anticoagulant compounds with properties similar to that of the compound represented by the structure of Formula I.

In one embodiment low molecular weight compounds of N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide characterized by the structure of Formula I are generated via digestion of the unfractionated or partially fractionated product with heparatinase thereby obtaining compounds of Formula I with a lower molecular mass.

In one embodiment the invention provides lower molecular mass derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan polysaccharide obtained via methodology disclosed herein. In one embodiment the lower molecular mass derivative is U GlcNS3S6S or in another embodiment the derivative is U GlcNAc6S GlcA GlcNS3S6S or in another embodiment the derivative is U GlcNAc6S GlcA GlcNS3S or in another embodiment the derivative is U GlcNS6S GlcA GlcNS3S6S with structures of which are represented by the formulas below 

In another embodiment the invention provides compositions comprising lower molecular mass derivatives herein described.

The heparatinases used to generate low molecular weight compounds of Formula I as described may be derived from any source both native or recombinant see for example U.S. Pat. No. 5 290 695 representing additional embodiments of the invention. In one embodiment Heparitinase I is utilized. In another embodiment Heparitinase II is utilized. In another embodiment Heparitinase III is utilized. In another embodiment any heparanase or endoglucuronidase may be utilized to cleave the polymers and any resulting oligosaccharide is to be considered as part of the present invention.

In one embodiment when sufficient digestion of the unfractionated or partially fractionated compound of Formula I has taken place the heparatinase is inactivated. Inactivation of the heparatinase can be effected in any one of a plurality of techniques employed in the art for enzyme inactivation including but not limited to heat inactivation dilution e.g. by dialysis exposure to extreme pH followed for example by neutralization and the like. The time required for sufficient digestion of the unfractionated or partially fractionated compound of Formula I will depend on several factors including but not limited to active heparatinase concentration temperature pH and solutes other than the enzyme and substrate. One ordinarily skilled in the art would know how to modify these factors so as to obtain controlled and repetitive performance.

It will be appreciated by one ordinarily skilled in the art that the heparatinase enzyme can be bound to a solid matrix and that the time of digestion of the unfractionated or partially fractionated heparin or heparan sulfate can thus by controlled by controlling the exposure time of the unfractionated or partially fractionated compound of Formula I to the solid matrix.

Monitoring the digestion reaction according to the present invention can be effected by periodic sampling and one of a plurality of known techniques including but not limited to high performance liquid chromatography conventional chromatography mass spectroscopy gel electrophoresis and the like. Thus when sufficient digestion of the unfractionated or partially fractionated compound of Formula I has taken place as determined by any one of the above techniques the heparatinase is inactivated so as to control the molecular mass of the resulting digestion products.

According to another embodiment of the present invention the compound of Formula I with a relatively low molecular mass generated following sufficient digestion with heparatinase is precipitated e.g. by the addition of ethanol and salt and appropriate centrifugation.

In another the compound of Formula I with a relatively low molecular mass generated following sufficient digestion with heparatinase is size fractionated and low molecular weight compound of Formula I of a specific molecular mass range is collected. Size fractionation can be effected by any one of a variety of techniques known in the art including but not limited to high performance liquid chromatography conventional chromatography mass spectroscopy gel electrophoresis differential filtration differential centrifugation differential dialysis and the like.

In one embodiment the ATIII binding sites in the compound represented by the structure of Formula I are maintained in compounds thus generated.

In another embodiment there is provided a method for the preparation of novel glycosaminoglycans comprising the steps of contacting a non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide with the enzymes N deacetylase N sulfotransferase and glucuronosyl C 5 epimerase to generate an iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide contacting the iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide with the enzymes 6 O sulfotransferase 6 OST and 3 O sulfotransferase 3 OST and isolating the product which yields N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan.

It is to be understood that the method according to this aspect of the invention includes all embodiments herein described for the generation of novel glycosaminoglycans.

In another embodiment the invention provides a method for controlling coagulation in a subject. The method comprises providing the subject with an effective amount of a compound comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I. In another embodiment the invention provides a method for controlling coagulation in a subject via providing the subject with a composition comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I

In another embodiment the invention provides a method for preventing or treating thrombosis in a subject comprising providing the subject with an effective amount of a compound comprising N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I.

As used herein the terms providing or contacting and corresponding forms of the words refer to both direct and indirect exposure to a compound or composition of the invention.

It is to be understood that the N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I provided to the subject may comprise any embodiment as herein described.

According to these aspects of the invention the N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I provided to the subject are in an amount sufficient to cure or at least partially diminish the subject s need for such treatment or preventive measures.

In one embodiment the subject suffers from a disease and the compound of Formula I or derivatives thereof are administered in an amount sufficient to cure or at least partially arrest the disease and or its symptoms. In one embodiment the disease is a blood coagulation disorder e.g. a hemostatic or thrombotic abnormality coagulation inhibitor deficiency or a disseminated intravascular condition. In another embodiment the disease is a result of a deficiency in at least one blood coagulation factor e.g. Factor VIII IX or both such as in hemophilia type a b or c See e.g. Williams Hematology infra Table 126 1 in Chapter 126 .

An amount adequate sufficient to cure or at least partially arrest the disease and or its symptoms is defined as an effective amount . Amounts effective for this use will depend upon the severity of the disease and the general state of the patient s health. Single or multiple administrations of the compositions may be administered depending on the dosage and frequency as required and tolerated by the subject. In any event the composition should provide a sufficient quantity of the active agents of the formulations of this invention to effectively treat ameliorate one or more symptoms the subject.

In another embodiment the N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide represented by the structure of Formula I are administered to the subject as part of a composition. It is to be understood that compositions as such are to include all embodiments described herein.

Routes of administration of the compounds and compositions of the invention include but are not limited to oral or local administration such as by aerosol intramuscularly transdermally or transmurally. In another embodiment the compounds and or compositions are provided parenterally such as intra arterially IA or intravenously TV . In another embodiment the compounds and or compositions are provided subcutaneously SC .

The term transmural is intended to include provision of localized delivery of the composition into the blood vessel or body lumen wall including neointimal intimal medial advential and periviascular spaces particularly adjacent to the target site.

In another embodiment delivery of the compounds and or compositions of the invention may be accomplished through a variety of known intravascular drug delivery systems. Such delivery systems include intravascular catheter delivery systems. A variety of catheter systems useful for the direct transmural infusion into the blood vessel are well known in the art For purposes of practicing the invention any of a variety of diagnostic or therapeutic type catheters could be used.

In another embodiment the compounds and or compositions of this invention are provided to the subject in conjunction with an angioplasty and balloon catheters can be used. Catheters having spaced apart or helical balloons for expansion within the lumen of a blood vessel and delivery of a therapeutic agent to the resulting isolated treatment site are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 279 546 5 226 888 5 181 911 4 824 436 and 4 636 195. Non balloon drug delivery catheters are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 180 366 5 112 305 and 5 021 044 and PCT Publication WO 92 11890. Catheters that provide for distal vessel access as well as stents may also can be used in another embodiment of this invention.

Compositions can be administered in a variety of unit dosage forms depending upon the method of administration. Suitable unit dosage forms include but are not limited to powders tablets pills capsules lozenges suppositories etc. Transdermal administration may be accomplished by application of a cream rinse gel etc. capable of allowing the active compounds to penetrate the skin. Parenteral routes of administration may include but are not limited to electrical or direct injection such as direct injection into a central venous line intravenous intramuscular intraperitoneal intradermal or subcutaneous injection.

Compositions of this invention suitable for parenteral administration include but are not limited to sterile isotonic solutions. Such solutions include but are not limited to saline and phosphate buffered saline for injection into a central venous line intravenous intramuscular intraperitoneal intradermal or subcutaneous injection.

In one embodiment the compounds of the present invention are combined with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier excipient to form a pharmacological composition. Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers can contain one or more physiologically acceptable compound s that act for example to stabilize the composition or to increase or decrease the absorption of the active agent s . Physiologically acceptable compounds can include for example carbohydrates such as glucose sucrose or dextrans antioxidants such as ascorbic acid or glutathione chelating agents low molecular weight proteins compositions that reduce the clearance or hydrolysis of the active agents or excipients or other stabilizers and or buffers.

Other physiologically acceptable compounds include wetting agents emulsifying agents dispersing agents or preservatives which are particularly useful for preventing the growth or action of microorganisms. Various preservatives are well known and include for example phenol and ascorbic acid. One skilled in the art would appreciate that the choice of pharmaceutically acceptable carrier s including a physiologically acceptable compound depends for example on the route of administration of the active agent s and on the particular physio chemical characteristics of the active agent s . The excipients are preferably sterile and generally free of undesirable matter. These compositions may be sterilized by conventional well known sterilization techniques.

The concentration of the derivatives in the formulation can vary widely and will be selected in one embodiment based on fluid volumes or in another embodiment based on viscosities or in another embodiment based on body weight and the like in accordance with the particular mode of administration selected and the subject s need.

The following are meant to provide materials methods and examples for illustrative purposes as a means of practicing executing the present invention and are not intended to be limiting.

HS precursor polysaccharide was prepared from K5 strain 9 . Heparan Sulfate C 5 epimerase 3 OST1 6 OST2a and NDST2 sulfotransferases were all cloned and expressed in baculovirus system 12 13 15 16 17 . S PAPS and S PAPS were prepared as reported earlier whereas S PAPS was purchased from Calbiochem. All chemicals were purchased from Sigma. ATIII and Factor Xa were from Haematologic Technologies Inc. Chromogenic substrate S 2765 was from Chromogenix. Heparitinase I II and III were obtained from Seikagagu. APS kinase was a generous gift from Professor I. H. Segel Univ. of California Davis .

A cDNA clone coding for human C5 epimerase was isolated from a human fetal brain cDNA panel origene Rockville Md. by screening with PCR primers spanning nucleotides 7 157 of the coding region. A donor plasmid for the preparation of recombinant baculovirus expressing a soluble form of the epimerase was constructed in pFastBac HT plasmid Gibco Grand Island N.Y. modified by the insertion of honeybee melittin signal peptide ahead of the histidine tag. The construction employed a synthetic oligonucleotide adapter that also encoded amino acids 35 44 of the epimerase and two restriction fragments isolated from the cDNA clone TaqI to EcoRI and EcoRI to SacI that incorporate the rest of the epimerase coding region.

Human glucuronyl C5 epimerase recombinant baculovirus was prepared using the donor and the Bac to Bac baculovirus expression system Life Technologies Inc. Grand Island N.Y. according to the manufacturer s protocol except that recombinant bacmid DNA was purified using an endotoxin free plasmid purification kit Qiagen Inc. Valencia Calif. and transfection of Sf9 cells was scaled up to employ 15 g of bacmid DNA and 2.5 10exponentially growing cells in four 100 mm dishes. Medium containing recombinant baculovirus was harvested at 3 days post transfection and amplified twice for about 65 hours each on Sf9 cells. The resulting high titer viral stock was stored in aliquots 0.75 ml sufficient to infect 3.5 10cells as determined by Western blotting of medium from infected cells using his 4 antibody Qiagen . Infected cells were plated in ten 150 mm dishes and incubated at 26 C. for 90 96 hours. The pooled medium was centrifuged at 400 g adjusted to 10 mM in HEPES titrated to pH 7.4 chilled on ice for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 16 000 g. The clarified pool diluted in half with 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4 made 1 mM in PMSF and applied to an 8 ml column of ToyoPearl AF heparin 650M TOSOHAAS Montgomeryville Pa. . The column was washed with 40 ml of HCG 50 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4 2 glycerol 0.6 CHAPS 50 mM NaCl and eluted with an 80 ml linear gradient of 50 to 600 mM NaCl in HCG. Aliquots of selected 1 ml fractions were analyzed by western blotting for the presence of the histidine tag adjusted to 500 mM in NaCl 10 mM in imidazole and concentrated an Amicon YM 10 membrane Amicon Bedford Mass. to about 3 ml.

Polysaccharides were digested with 1 mU of Hep I II and III in a total volume of 100 l of 40 mM Ammonium acetate containing 1 mM Calcium chloride buffer pH 7.0 at 37 C. overnight.

An Ultimate capillary HPLC workstation Dionex Sunnyvale USA was used for microseparation. UltiChrom software was used in data acquisition and analysis. A gradient elution was performed using a binary solvent system composed of water eluent A and 70 aqueous methanol eluent B both containing 8 mM acetic acid and 5 mM dibutylamine as an ion pairing agent. HPLC separations were performed on a 0.3 mm 250 mm C18 polymeric silica column Vydac Hesperia USA . The column temperature was maintained at 25 C. and the flow rate was set to 5 mL min 1. Sample volumes of 6.3 mL were injected. The chromatographic conditions were optimized for resolution of disaccharides. In brief non sulfated disaccharide was eluted with 100 A single sulfated disaccharides were eluted with 10 B isocratic elution with 20 B for double sulfated disaccharides followed by isocratic elation with 35 B for triple sulfated disaccharide. The column was washed and equilibrated by further elution with 100 B for 10 min returning to 100 A for 10 min at the end of the run. The absorbance of the column eluate was monitored at 232 nm.

Mass spectra were acquired on a Mariner BioSpectrometry Workstation ESI time of flight mass spectrometer PerSeptive Biosystems Framingham Mass. . In the negative ion mode the instrument was calibrated with bis trifluoromethyl benzoic acid heptadecafluorononanoic acid and perfluorotetradecanoic acid. Nitrogen was used as a desolvation gas as well as a nebulizer. Conditions for ESI MS were as follows nebulizer flow 0.75 L min nozzle temperature 140 C. drying gas N2 flow 1.2 L min spray tip potential 2.8 kV nozzle potential 70 V and skimmer potential 12 V. Negative ion spectra were generated by scanning the range of m z 40 2000. During analyses the indicated vacuum was 1.9 10Torr.

The labeling 2 buffer contains 50 mM MES pH 7.0 1 W V triton X 100 5 mM MgCl 5 mM MnCl 2.5 MM CaCl 0.075 mg ml protamine chloride 1.5 mg ml BSA or 25 mM HEPES 40 mM CaCl pH 6.5 with or without p40. For a 2500 l reaction the following were assembled polysaccharide final concentration was 1 mM equivalent of unmodified disaccharide 1250 l of 2 buffer 50 ng of the expressed sulfotransferase or epimerase S 3 phosphoadenosine 5 phosphosulfate PAPS 1.0 10cpm or S PAPS final concentration of 20 M and the appropriate amount of water. The reaction was incubated at 37 C. for 12 hours then diluted to 5 ml with DEAE wash buffer and purified on DEAE column. Alternatively the reaction was stopped by heating at 70 C. and the reaction mixture was centrifuged at 10 000 g for 3 min and the supernatant was used for gel mobility shift analysis. Modified polysaccharide was digested with heparitinases I II and III and was analyzed by capillary HPLC ESI TOF MS.

Heparin ATIII binding buffer contained 12 glycerol 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.9 100 mM KCl 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT. For a typical 20 l binding reaction radiolabeled polysaccharide 10 000 cpm was mixed with AT III 1 g in the binding buffer. The reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature 23 C. for 20 min and was then applied to a 4.5 native polyacrylamide gel with 0.1 of bis acrylamide . The gel buffer was 10 mM Tris pH 7.4 and 1 mM EDTA and the electrophoresis buffer was 40 mM Tris pH 8.0 40 mM acetic acid 1 mM EDTA. The gel was run at 6 volts cm for 1 2 hours with an SE 250 Mighty Small II gel apparatus Hoefer Scientific Instruments San Francisco . After electrophoresis the gel was transferred to 3 MM paper and dried under vacuum. The dried gel was autoradiographed by a PhosphorImager 445SI Molecular Dynamics Sunnyvale Calif. . The image was analyzed with NIH Image 1.60 and band intensities were evaluated.

Human factor Xa 10.4 mg ml 50 glycerol 820 units mg Hematologic Technologies Essex Junction Vt. was used for assay. Factor Xa was diluted 1 200 with PBS containing 1 mg of bovine serum albumin 4 units ml and 15 units ml respectively . ATIII 2.5 mg ml GlycoMed Calif. was diluted 1 200 to give a 2 10M stock solution. The chromogenic substrate S 2765 was from Chromogenix West Chester Ohio and the stock solution of 1 mM with 1 mg ml Polybrene in water was prepared. Heparin 174 international units mg Sigma was used as a standard. The N deacetylated N sulfated polysaccharide product was used for factor Xa studies 10 ng . The protocol involved adding 25 l of ATIII 2 10M to 25 l of a serial dilution of heparin standards or N deacetylated N sulfated polysaccharide in Tris EDTA 50 mM Tris 7.5 mM EDTA and 175 mM NaCl pH 8.4 buffer. The reaction was incubated at 37 C. for 75 seconds. Factor Xa 25 l 4 units ml was added. After incubating at 37 C. for 195 seconds 25 l of S 2765 was added. The absorbance at 405 nm was read every minute for 10 minutes using a Beckman UV spectrometer.

A non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharide the compound represented by the structure of Formula III step 1 was isolated from the strain K5 9 which resembles the unmodified nascent HS chain and was used as a starting material. Synthesis of an N sulfated polysaccharide enriched with iduronic acid represented by the structure of Formula II was catalyzed by N deacetylase N sulfotransferase NDST and C 5 epimerase step 2 . These two initial modifications were the essential gateway for subsequent enzymatic modifications 10 .

A single protein catalyzes both N deacetylation and N sulfation. These two reactions are tightly coupled in vivo since free glucosamine residues are rarely found in HS and Heparin even though each activity can be studied separately in vitro. The NDST enzyme exists as four isoforms in humans 11 . The NDST2 isoform was utilized to selectively N deacetylate and N sulfate glucosamine units 12 . The deacetylation and N sulfation was carried out in the presence of the Heparan Sulfate C 5 epimerase 13 14 enzyme in order to generate the iduronic acid enriched polysaccharide the compound represented by the structure of Formula II .

The stereochemical nature at the C 5 carbon of uronic acid is reversed during transformation of the compound represented by the structure of Formula II to the compound represented by the structure of Formula II of . Epimerization proceeds on condition that uronic acid residues are located at the reducing side of N sulfated glucosamine residues. Epimerization will not proceed should the uronic acid be O sulfated or be adjacent to O sulfated glucosamine residues or N acetylglucosamine units 10 14 . The stereochemical constraint imposed indicates that epimerization occurs immediately following N deacetylation and N sulfation but prior to O sulfation.

The sterochemical constraint was exploited in the synthetic strategy of the present invention. NDST2 and C5 epimerase activity was coupled in order to prepare in a single step N sulfated polysaccharide the compound represented by the structure of Formula II containing both glucuronic and iduronic acid without 2 O sulfation.

The final step step 3 in the synthesis of the N deacetylate N sulfate derivatives of non sulfated N acetyl heparosan HS polysaccharides the compound represented by the structure of Formula I was catalyzed by combined activity of 6 O sulfotransferase 6 OST and 3 O sulfotransferase 3 OST . There are three heparan sulfate 6 O sulfotransferase isoforms 6 OST1 6 OST2 6 OST2a and 6 OST2b are two splice variants and 6 OST3 15 . Though all three isoforms sulfate CDSNS Heparin equally well 15 N sulfo heparosan was preferentially sulfated in the following order 6 OST2 sulfated to a greater extent than 6 OST3 which sulfated to a much greater extent as compared to 6 OST1. The 6 OST2a isoform was utilized to catalyze the 6 O sulfation of glucosamine units in Formula II.

6 O sulfation was coupled with 3 O sulfation which is catalyzed by 3 OST1 sulfotransferase 16 . There are as many as five isoforms of heparan sulfate 3 O sulfotransferases namely 3 OST1 3 OST2 3 OST3 3 OST4 and 3 OST5 17 18 . 3 OST1 has been shown primarily responsible for generating the anticoagulant heparan 19 . 3 OST1 generally acts on glucosamine units flanked by the reducing side of glucuronic acid GlcUA and the non reducing side of iduronic acid IdoA to generate anti thrombin AT III antibody binding structures containing GlcUA GlcNSS and GlcUA GlcNSSS 19 21 . Coupling of 6 O sulfation and 3 O sulfation was conducted in order to determine whether this coupling would shorten the time required for total synthesis of the compound represented by the structure of Formula I which was readily accomplished.

The final step was also carried out in the presence of radioactive PAPS to prepare the radiolabeled compound represented by the structure of Formula I in order to test its ability to bind to anti thrombin III ATIII by gel mobility shift assay 22 . The synthesized compound represented by the structure of Formula I was found to bind to ATIII. In the presence of ATIII the compound bound specifically to ATIII and hence its mobility was retarded whereas in the absence of ATIII the compound migrated more rapidly .

A greater percentage of the compound of Formula I bound ATIII as compared to in vitro modified commercial heparin. This result was further confirmed by a heparin dependent factor Xa inhibition assay . The specific activity of the compound of Formula I was approximately 4 5 times that of commercial heparin.

Finally the compound of Formula I was subjected to structural analysis following cleavage by heparitinases I II and III via capillary liquid chromatography coupled to electro spray mass spectrometry LC MS 23 . The LC MS analysis showed one major tri sulfated disaccharide containing a 3 O sulfated glucosamine unit U GlcNS3S6S corresponding to molecular ion 576.0 M 1H 1 and two other minor disaccharides U GlcNS3S and U GlcNS6S corresponding to molecular ion 496.1 M 1H 1. The LC MS analysis also confirmed the presence of many tetrasaccharides which are resistant to further cleavage by heparitinases due to the presence of 3 O sulfate groups. These 3 O sulfated tetrasaccharides are U GlcNAc6S GlcA GlcNS3S6S with molecular ion 517.0 M 2H 2 U GlcNAc6S GlcA GlcNS3S with molecular ion 477.1 M 2H 2 U GlcNS6S GlcA GlcNS3S6S with molecular ion 536.0 M 2H 2.

This result demonstrated that the compound of Formula I consists of multiple ATIII binding sites within the polymer and indicates why the compound has greater ability to inhibit factor Xa. Since the compound is free of 2 O sulfated iduronic acid residues we expect that it will have a reduced ability to bind to PF4 which should decrease its ability to cause HIT and at the same time increase its anticoagulant activity against the platelet rich thrombi present on the arterial side of the circulation.

