---

title: Nanoelectrode array for electrochemical analysis
abstract: A nanoelectrode array comprises a plurality of nanoelectrodes wherein the geometric dimensions of the electrode controls the electrochemical response, and the current density is independent of time. By combining a massive array of nanoelectrodes in parallel, the current signal can be amplified while still retaining the beneficial geometric advantages of nanoelectrodes. Such nanoelectrode arrays can be used in a sensor system for rapid, non-contaminating field analysis. For example, an array of suitably functionalized nanoelectrodes can be incorporated into a small, integrated sensor system that can identify many species rapidly and simultaneously under field conditions in high-resistivity water, without the need for chemical addition to increase conductivity.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07625469&OS=07625469&RS=07625469
owner: Sandia Corporation
number: 07625469
owner_city: Albuquerque
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050316
---
This invention was made with Government support under contract no. DE AC04 94AL85000 awarded by the U.S. Department of Energy to Sandia Corporation. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to electrochemical analysis and more particularly to a nanoelectrode array that can be used for in situ analysis of chemicals in water.

Electrochemical analysis is a highly sensitive chemically selective method for identifying and quantifying many different chemicals in water. Sub part per billion sensitivity levels are achievable for many EPA regulated chemicals and for many of the chemicals proposed for future regulation. Unfortunately electrochemical analysis has historically required that field samples be transported to an analytical laboratory where additional laboratory chemicals must be added to the samples before an electrochemical analysis can be performed with bench scale equipment. This requires skilled laboratory technicians and causes unacceptable time delays when immediate information about the safety of a particular water source is needed. Furthermore sample degradation may occur during sample transport to the laboratory thereby causing further uncertainty in the analytical results. Conventional off site laboratory analysis is also too costly if comprehensive continuous monitoring of the health of a water distribution system is desired.

The necessary addition of chemicals for currently available electrodes to work well with many water samples is a key limiting factor preventing on site real time measurements and distributed unmanned operation. Due to their size the macroscale working electrodes most often used in electroanalysis today require the addition of an electrolyte to the solution to adjust the conductivity ionic strength and or pH of the solution before an accurate electrochemical analysis can be made. Recently there has been emphasis on scaling down the working electrode to microscale dimensions to achieve geometry related increases in the diffusion limited current density. Unfortunately the incorporation of microelectrodes in analytical methods is severely hampered by the small faradaic currents i.e. small analytical signals typical for these electrodes. Furthermore microelectrodes also require supporting electrolytes for proper operation. For example a 1 m diameter working electrode typically requires that a supporting electrolyte solution be added to achieve a minimum resistivity of 80 100 cm. This necessitates the presence of a trained technician to properly adjust solution concentrations.

Further reduction of the electrode dimension from the microscale to the nanoscale can remove these resistivity limitations enabling unattended operation or direct measurements by simple immersion in a water source without any electrolyte addition. However because the faradaic current from an individual nanoelectrode is very small a massive array of nanoelectrodes is required to obtain an adequate current signal. Furthermore integrated nanoelectrode arrays and portable control electronics are needed to enable reliable electrochemical measurements to be made in the field. Such integrated nanoelectrode arrays are not readily available using current fabrication techniques. The nanoelectrode array of the present invention overcomes the limitations of current electrode designs and can enable both portable battery powered field testing and continuous remote system monitoring.

The present invention is directed to a nanoelectrode array comprising an electrically conducting substrate an insulating layer on the substrate and a plurality of hollow pores formed through the insulating layer to provide a plurality of working nanoelectrodes wherein each working nanoelectrode has a critical dimension and the plurality of working electrodes has a uniform inter electrode spacing between each working nanoelectrode. The nanoelectrode array can further comprise a conducting layer deposited on the top surface of the insulating layer to provide a counter electrode. The critical dimension of the plurality of working nanoelectrodes is preferably less than 1 micron and more preferably less than 100 nm. The inter electrode spacing is preferably greater than ten times the critical dimension. The working nanoelectrodes can be functionalized to provide selectivity for a specific analyte.

The invention is further directed to a method for fabricating a nanoelectrode array comprising depositing a positive resist layer on an electrically conducting substrate forming a latent image of a pore pattern in the resist layer by nanoscale lithography and developing the resist to provide a plurality of hollow pores through the resist layer. The method can further comprise depositing a counter electrode layer on the top surface of the resist to provide a sandwich nanoelectrode array.

Shown in is electrochemical diffusion to a planar macroelectrode. In general the sensitivity of an electrochemical planar electrode is proportional to the diffusion limited current density iafter application of a step potential according to

Also shown in is diffusion to a nanoelectrode. As the dimension of the electrode decreases the edge effects of current density become dominant as compared to a planar macroelectrode case. The response of a spherical electrode to a potential step function in the limiting current region is given by

Therefore nano scaled electrodes have geometric advantages over larger electrodes for electrochemical sensing. In particular nanoelectrodes can extend the range of measurable current densities due to the fact that limiting current densities are inversely proportional to the radius of the electrode. For example a nanoelectrode of radius r 40 nm can provide a diffusion limited current density of about i 5 A cmfor an electroactive species concentration of 10 mM based on MW 100 with n 2 and D 1 10. Such limiting current densities cannot be reached at steady state by either rotating disk electrodes operating at 10rpm or by any other agitation method. Having a very large limiting current density at steady state not affected by solution flow is particularly beneficial in the analysis of trace elements. Furthermore because of the smaller total currents at nanoelectrodes electrochemical sensing can be done in highly resistive solutions that would develop large ohmic drops with conventional electrodes.

However nanoelectrodes do have some disadvantages. Since a single electrode is small the total faradaic current flowing in the circuit can be very small. For a 40 nm radius nanoelectrode the total electrode surface area is only about 5 10cm. Therefore for a diffusion limited current density of 1 mA cmthe total current is only about 5 10A which can be difficult to measure accurately. Furthermore these electrodes have a very high volume to surface ratio. Therefore the measurements can be effected by impurities accumulating on the surface during measurement.

A solution to these problems is to use a massive array of nanoelectrodes. By combining a massive array of nanoelectrodes in parallel the current signal can be amplified while still retaining the beneficial geometric advantages of nanoelectrodes. For example an array of 40 nm radius electrodes with an areal density of 1 10electrodes cmcan produce an easily detectable current density of about 5 A cm i.e. 5 A total current from a 1 cmarray from a 1 ppb analyte concentration even in solutions with resistivities as high as 10 cm typical of deionized water.

The challenge of designing such an array is obtaining a proper ratio of the electrode radius to the length between electrodes r L. If this ratio is too large the diffusion fields of the individual electrodes will overlap resulting in a single planar electrode effect. Conversely if the ratio is too small the total active surface area of the array is low making total current flow difficult to measure. Fortunately the limiting current ican be controlled by varying the design and geometry of the array.

When r 0.3 the diffusion layer is small compared to the electrode radius and the system is in the range of semi infinite linear diffusion near each large electrode. Therefore current density is time dependent and the diffusion limited current per unit of total surface area Iis given by

When r 3 but L 0.3 the diffusion field around each electrode is hemispherical and the overlap between the diffusion fields of neighboring electrodes is negligible. Current and current density is then independent of time according to

However when L 3 i.e. very long times there is complete overlap between the diffusion fields of individual electrodes and the array again appears as one large planar electrode. The current density is again time dependent according to

Therefore each nanoelectrode preferably satisfies r 3 so that the geometric dimensions of the electrode control the electrochemical response and the current density is independent of time. Furthermore for the individual electrodes to act independently according to Eq. 5 the diffusion fields should not overlap i.e. L r 10 . If the electrodes are spaced more closely the resulting diffusion fields from each electrode will overlap each other and the faradaic current collected with an array of nanoelectrodes mimics that observed with a planar electrode. Therefore the inter electrode spacing of the nanoelectrodes in the array is preferably ten times greater than the critical dimension of the nanoelectrode so that the current is time independent. Furthermore to maximize the total current of the array each nanoelectrode preferably has a critical dimension i.e. radius for a disc or hemisphere width for a band that is in the sub micron and more preferably in the sub 100 nanometer regime.

Such nanoelectrode arrays can be used in a sensor system for rapid non contaminating field analysis. For example an array of suitably functionalized nanoelectrodes can be incorporated into a small integrated sensor system that can identify many species rapidly and simultaneously under field conditions in high resistivity water without the need for chemical addition to increase conductivity. Signal to noise ratios can be up to 10 fold greater than conventional planar electrodes. The individual nanoelectrodes within an array can be chemically treated to provide a working electrode surface with enhanced specificity and sensitivity for priority analytes. Further selectivity in the analysis including discrimination from interfering species in the water can be derived from the fact that the thermodynamics and kinetics of the heterogeneous electron transfer reaction i.e. the reduction or oxidation of the analyte are different from those of many interferents. For example the deposition of gold surfaces in the nanoelectrode array provides a working electrode surface that is well suited to the analysis of As III As V Hg II HgCl so called reactive mercury Cr III Cr VI Pb II and other priority analytes in water sources. Chemical modification of the nanoelectrode surfaces with polymeric coatings can also increase the selectivity and sensitivity of some analyses via preferential adsorption of the analyte in the coating. See e.g. A. Cavicchioli et al. Analysis and Speciation of Traces of Arsenic in Environmental Food and Industrial Samples by Voltammetry A Review 16 697 2004 Y. Bonfil et al. Characteristics of Subtractive Anodic Stripping Voltammetry of Lead Cadmium and Thallium at the Silver Gold Alloy Electrodes 15 1369 2003 R. Feeney and S. P. Kounaves Voltammetric measurement of arsenic in natural waters 58 23 2002 and R. Feeney and S. P. Kounaves On Site Analysis in Groundwater Using a Microfabricated Gold Ultramicroelectrode Array 72 2222 2000 which are incorporated herein by reference.

Preferably the nanoelectrodes are arranged in an orderly array with a uniform inter electrode spacing to achieve the highest total current and an electrochemical response in the three dimensional 3D diffusion regime. However the fabrication of such orderly nanoelectrode arrays has been difficult. Prior nanoelectrode ensembles have had randomly spaced nanoelectrodes and inter electrode spacings that are either too small resulting in one dimensional diffusion from overlap of the diffusion fields of the individual electrodes or too large resulting in an inadequate total current. See D. W. Arrigan Nanoelectrodes nanoelectrode arrays and their applications 129 1157 2004 and C. G. Zoski Ultramicroelectrodes Design Fabrication and Characterization 14 1041 2002 which are incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention uses nanoscale lithography to pattern an ordered array of nanopores in an insulating template film. The insulating template films can be formed on a conducting substrate. The pores can be modified or filled to from nanoelectrodes. Preferably the nanoelectrodes are of a uniform cross section e.g. a circular disc and are arrayed in an orderly pattern e.g. a square or hexagonal array . The conducting substrate can be interconnect the nanoelectrodes in parallel. In a parallel array the measured current of the array can be increased while taking advantage of the improved electrochemical response of each nanoelectrode. Alternatively the working nanoelectrodes can comprise a plurality of arrays wherein each array is independently addressable through a patterned conductor on the substrate to measure differences in the electrochemical response of each array. The independently addressable arrays can thereby be used to determine different analytes. In are shown schematic illustration of methods to fabricate different embodiments of the nanoelectrode array.

The nanopores can be formed in the template film by directed beam or projection methods. For example electron beam lithography uses a high energy beam of electrons to form nanopores in a resist coated substrate by direct writing. An inexpensive positive resist that has a good sensitivity tone resolution and etching resistance such as poly methyl methacrylate PMMA can be used as the template film. Because the electron beam can have a large depth of focus high aspect ration cylindrical pores with uniform diameters can be formed through the resist layer. Most importantly the pore radius can be sub 100 nm because the feature resolution achievable with a high energy electron beam is not limited by diffraction as is the case with optical lithography. The minimum resolution is typically about 10 nm limited by electron scattering in solids. Furthermore the registration of the electron beam can be precisely controlled by scanning electrostatic and magnetic fields enabling the formation of orderly high density arrays. Disadvantages are the relatively slow point by point exposure speed and the high cost of current electron beam lithography systems. Other lithography methods capable of nanoscale resolution such as extreme ultraviolet X ray or ion beam lithography can also be used to form the template.

In are shown scanning electron micrographs of resist templates with 200 nm diameter pores spaced 10 and 1.4 microns apart respectively formed by electron beam lithography. A low density array having a 10 micron inter electrode spacing i.e. L r 100 provides an electrode density of about 9 million electrodes cm. A high density array having nanoelectrodes spaced 1.4 microns apart i.e. L r 14 provides about 90 million electrodes cm.

In is shown a schematic illustration of a nanoelectrode array formed in an insulating template film on a conducting substrate to provide a parallel array. For example the template film can be a layer of PMMA resist that is spun on to a copper substrate coated with an evaporated nickel or gold film. The conducting substrate can alternately comprise a patterned conducting layer on an insulating substrate to provide a plurality of independently addressable arrays. The template film comprises an array of nanoscale hollow pores that can be formed in the template film by nanoscale lithography. The pores can comprise hollow cylinders to form a disc electrode or hollow trenches to form a band electrode . For example direct writing either point by point or a line with an electron beam on the resist coated substrate creates a latent image of the pore pattern in the resist material. The resist can then be developed to remove the exposed resist material and provide a plurality of hollow pores through the resist layer that are substantially perpendicular to the substrate. Preferably the pores form an orderly array. The pores can be can be left unfilled so that the open pore areas on the conducting substrate provide nanoelectrodes having a recessed disc or band electrode geometry. Alternatively the pores can be partially filled as shown with an electrode material or completely filled to provide an inlaid disc or band electrode geometry. The pores can be filled by a number of methods including electrodeposition chemical vapor deposition physical vapor deposition and sol gel deposition to form the nanoelectrodes. For example the pores can be filled using periodic pulse electrodeposition of gold or silver.

The top surface of the insulating layer can further comprise an integral counter electrode to provide a sandwich nanoelectrode array . Since the counter electrode can be very close to the working nanoelectrodes the sandwich array can enable an electrochemical sensor having a very small ohmic drop in solution. Furthermore the counter electrode can be sized to enhance sensitivity to electrochemical processes that occur at the working nanoelectrodes . To fabricate the sandwich nanoelectrode array a thin plating base can be deposited on the bare top surface of the insulating template layer by physical vapor deposition at a low angle as shown in . Any residual plating base material that is deposited on the inner surfaces of the pores can be cleared using a pulse of high current. A robust counter electrode can be electroplated on the plating base to provide the sandwich nanoelectrode array as shown in .

Alternatively the recessed nanoelectrodes can be further built up in the pores or functionalized by deposition of additional electrode material to provide a functionalized nanoelectrode array . A sacrificial material layer can be deposited on the bare top surface of the insulating template layer by physical vapor deposition at a low angle as shown in . The additional electrode material can be built up by a line of sight deposition that covers the entire exposed area and fills the pores as shown in . Finally the material deposited on the top surface of the template layer can be removed by a lift off process by dissolving the underlying sacrificial material in a selective etchant providing the functionalized nanoelectrode array shown in . Additionally a counter electrode not shown can be deposited on the top surface of template layer by the sandwich nanoelectrode array process described above.

Electrochemical processes that occur at the working nanoelectrodes can be measured with a current voltage or resistance measuring device to determine the presence of an electroactive analyte. In general the nanoelectrode array of the present invention can be used to detect any electroactive analyte that exhibits a redox potential. For example the nanoelectrode array can be used for amperometric potentiometric or conductometric sensing.

Chronoamperometry involves stepping the potential of the working electrode from a value at which no faradaic current occurs to a potential at which the surface concentration of the electroactive species is effectively zero. Since mass transport under these conditions is diffusion controlled the resulting current time curve reflects the change in concentration gradient in the vicinity of the surface. The current decay therefore indicates the decay of the diffusion layer. For a planar electrode the current will decay according to Eq. 1 . However for 3D diffusion control of the flux the decaying current reaches an approximately steady state after a certain time according to Eq. 2 .

The current time profiles shown in demonstrate the stability of the nanoelectrode arrays compared to the planar electrode in low conductive solutions. Transient background currents are associated with surface redox reactions. Both the low density and the high density nanoelectrode arrays have lower signal to noise levels at open or near open circuit potentials. After a 400 mV voltage step was applied to the arrays the current stabilized to a steady state after the charging transit indicating 3D diffusion control. Conversely the planar electrode displayed a large transit that quickly decayed into the baseline indicating semi infinite linear diffusion.

Cyclic voltammetry CV is a widely used electrochemical analysis technique. A voltammogram is a current potential curve obtained by measuring the current at a working electrode as the potential is linearly ramped in an electrochemical cell containing an electroactive specie. In the presence of these electroactive species an increase in the current is seen when the potential on the electrode is sufficiently positive or negative to cause oxidation or reduction of the species present. The magnitude and position of the resulting electrochemical signal can be used as a diagnostic for the species present.

In are shown voltammograms from the low density nanoelectrode array in a dilute solution of 1.0 mM potassium ferricyanide KFe CN in deionized water. Ferricyanide has well known oxidation and reduction peak positions. A standard lab cell comprising the low density array as the working electrode a counter electrode and an Ag AgCl reference electrode at constant temperature without agitation was used to obtain the voltammograms. The voltammograms display a strong oxidation peak at about 750 mV in a solution without the addition of a conducting salt.

In are shown voltammograms from three working electrodes in a dilute solution of 1.0 mM potassium ferricyanide KFe CN in deionized water. The working electrodes included the low density gold nanoelectrode array the high density gold nanoelectrode array and a standard 5 mm planar gold electrode. Because of the scale of the response the voltammograms obtained with the low density array are collapsed in the figure. However as the number of electrodes in the array increase the response signal increases. Therefore the CV scan of the high density nanoelectrode array is much larger than the low density array.

Electrochemical methods can be used to analyze chemicals in water. Cyclic voltammograms were obtained for the trace element lead using both the planar gold electrode and the low density gold nanoelectrode array as working electrodes and a quasi ref counter electrode. The solution consisted of 0.5 mM Pb in a supporting electrolyte of 10 mM KCl and 10 mM HNO. The CV voltage was scanned from 0 mV to 1000 mV at a scan rate was 25 mV per second.

In is shown a CV scan of 0.5 mM Pb using the 5 mm diameter planar gold electrode taken at a scan rate of 25 mV sec. A bulk deposition peak is observed at about 375 mV vs. a Ag AgCl reference electrode . The height of the bulk peak which is proportional to the lead concentration is about 75 A cm. Under potential deposition UPD is possible for dissimilar metals at potentials below the standard thermodynamic potential. Therefore a UPD peak is seen at about 268 mV resulting from the deposition of a lead monolayer on the gold electrode. The height of the UPD peak is about 17 A cm. UPD can be used for trace metal detection at potential windows lower than the standard potential thus avoiding other competing reactions that are common at higher potentials.

In is shown a CV scan of Pb using the low density gold nanoelectrode array having the same footprint as the planar electrode. The scan for the array is similar to that of the planar electrode although the current density is higher. The height of the bulk peak is about 170 A cm more than twice that of the planar electrode but with less than 0.3 of the exposed working electrode area. The UPD is almost 6 times greater than the UPD peak generated using the planar electrode under similar test conditions.

In is shown a CV scan of Pb using the sandwich nanoelectrode array taken at a scan rate of 10 mV sec. Again large bulk and UPD peaks are observed.

The present invention has been described as a nanoelectrode array for electrochemical analysis. It will be understood that the above description is merely illustrative of the applications of the principles of the present invention the scope of which is to be determined by the claims viewed in light of the specification. Other variants and modifications of the invention will be apparent to those of skill in the art.

