---

title: Method and apparatus for signature reduction using wavefront coding
abstract: The invention applies wavefront coding to the front of an electro-optic/infrared device to minimize the amount of light which is retroreflected by systems, such as Fowarding Looking Infrared systems, back to its source. The invention (unlike conventional reduction methods) does not rely on reducing the laser power leaving the interrogated sensor, but primarily on controlling its direction. A sensor according to the present invention, which has been wavefront coded for reduction of reflected light, will also effect the direction of the scattered light, thereby significantly reducing that which returns to the zero bistatic angle position. In contrast, a limitation of conventional methods is that once specular reflections are addressed, the remaining retroreflected signal typically results from scattered light at the focal plane which is largely collected and recollimated by the system optics.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07576791&OS=07576791&RS=07576791
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07576791
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050420
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured used sold imported and or licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America.

This invention relates to electro optic and infrared devices and reducing the retro reflectivity of these devices and in particular of Forward Looking Infrared FLIR systems.

Infrared IR staring sensors are well known in the prior art for obtaining data in the IR spectrum. Typically these sensors include an optical train that minimizes the optical blur spot at the focal plane. The optical train receives the optical rays through an aperture and then directs the incoming IR optical rays onto a focal plane array FPA for further processing and display by other components of the device. One of the disadvantages of these devices however is that during operation a portion of the incoming IR radiation actually reflects off the focal plane array passes back through the optical device and leaves the device through the aperture as an IR emission signal. This phenomenon is known as retro reflectivity.

It is desirable that the retro reflectivity for the device be minimized so that the IR staring sensor is undetectable during operation of the device. One such device that minimizes the retro reflectivity of IR staring sensors is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 862 147 issued on Mar. 1 2005 to Sonstroem which is incorporated herein by reference.

Combining optical and digital signal processing has recently become a very popular method to provide digital sensors with both aberration relief and extended depth of field. This technique is known as Wavefront Coding and has been described for extended depth of field applications. Military related research on using this particular method for extended depth of field was also studied.

The practice of enhancing frequency response through processing has been used for many years in both optical and radar imaging systems. Commonly known as frequency boost it has been used in optical systems with low noise for enhancing high frequency response for long range identification. Wavefront Coding employs a very similar method of using a frequency post filter to enhance the digitally recorded imagery. However the Wavefront Coding method differs in that it requires a special optical element to be placed in the system optics which is designed to match characteristics of the digital filter. By designing both the optic and the filter concurrently the sensor system can be tailored to be invariant to certain aberrations or have extended depth of field the most common application .

The special optical element in Wavefront Coding is called a phase mask or phase plate because it is used as an optical phase filter. As such it is typically placed in or near an aperture stop or pupil plane to modify the wavefront shape or phase delay in the pupil. The entrance and exits pupils of any optical system contain all the spatial frequency information for the imaging system and maintain a direct Fourier Transform relationship with the image. By altering the wavefront in the pupil one can directly manipulate the spatial frequencies and shape of the system s point spread function PSF . One can specifically design the surface sag of the phase mask to dominate certain aberrations and produce a PSF that remains invariant to those aberrations.

Given the above there is a need in the art to reduce an EO IR system s retro reflectivity. This invention addresses this need.

Accordingly one object of the present invention is to reduce the retro reflectivity in infrared staring sensors in particular forward looking infrared FLIR systems. The present invention achieves this objective by applying wavefront coding to minimize the amount of light that is retroreflected by the FLIR system back to its source. The present invention unlike conventional retro reflectivity reduction methods does not rely on reducing the laser power leaving the interrogated sensor but primarily on controlling its direction. A sensor according to the present invention which has been wavefront coded for reduction of reflected light will also effect the direction of the scattered light thereby significantly reducing that which returns to the zero bistatic angle position. In contrast a limitation of conventional methods is that once specular reflections are addressed the remaining retroreflected signal typically results from scattered light at the focal plane which is largely collected and recollimated by the system optics.

The invention applies wavefront coding to an Electro Optic Infrared EO IR device for example an infrared staring sensor such that the retroreflected wavefront can be modified to reduce the signature of the device. Implicit in the wavefront coding technique is the ability to code the wavefront to a specific advantage and then decode it through signal processing. In this case the advantage is to minimize the amount of light that is retroreflected by a sensor back to its source.

In one embodiment of the invention the phase plate is placed at the pupil of the optics between lens and in a telescope configuration in order to modify the retroreflected wavefront coming back into the system from the source. This is illustrated in . Those skilled in the art of Wavefront coding will recognize that the phase plate can be tailored to minimize the retroreflection effect. Those skilled in the art of Wavefront coding will also recognize that the optical aberrations resulting from the phase plate can and must be compensated by image processing techniques to restore the image.

One way of testing the retro reflectivity of a infrared staring sensors is by using a system that consists of a laser source and co located receiver optic and detector. As the system scans the infrared staring sensor true retroreflections from the sensor return to the laser source receiver the angle between the source and receiver is known as bistatic angle and should ideally be near zero the monostatic condition . In general if the sensor has near diffraction limited optics then the retroreflected beam forms an Airy like pattern back at the receiver with the highest intensity of the Airy pattern centered on the receiver at zero bistatic angle. The opportunity with wavefront coding is to tailor the retroreflected wavefront to have a null or local minimum at the zero bistatic position.

The invention therefore unlike all conventional reduction methods to date does not rely on reducing the laser power leaving the interrogated sensor but primarily on controlling its direction. A sensor according to the invention which has been wavefront coded for reduction of reflected light should also affect the direction of the scattered light significantly reducing that which returns to the zero bistatic angle position. This is in contrast to the inherent limitation of conventional methods that once specular reflections are addressed the remaining retroreflected signal typically results from scattered light at the focal plane That which is largely collected and recollimated by the system optics .

Table 1 below summarizes advantages and disadvantages specific to implementing wavefront coding for reducing the retro reflectivity in sensor systems. The table notes that the location of the phase plate is the primary issue. This is listed as a disadvantage since many sensors of interest are already designed and the pupil location is not friendly to insertion of a phase plate. An additional concern is that sensors with two or more fields of view might require a moving phase plate or two or more phase plates. These are very practical concerns for some applications which must be considered up front.

Experimental results showed rather minimal reduction in the signature using a cubic phaseplate. Modeling however demonstrated that the cubic phase function is not appropriate for the signature reduction application due to the perfect negative phase symmetry of the phaseplate surface. An appropriate phase function would do just the opposite upon retroreflection adding to the initial phase errors on the second pass.

Therefore given particular applications the phase plate can be made a part of the lens or at a minimum should be positioned at the pupil of the sensor. Based on this positioning one skilled in the art could devise a method to process the signals to optimize the direction of the signal being retro reflected from the sensor but also permit the sensor to clearly depict the images it is receiving.

