---

title: Methods for assessing a condition by analyzing blood in cerebrospinal fluid
abstract: The present invention provides methods for assessing a condition in an individual by analyzing a cerebrospinal fluid sample from the individual, for example, by spectroscopy. Further, the invention provides methods for determining an amount of blood in the cerebrospinal fluid sample; methods for determining concentrations of analytes in the cerebrospinal fluid sample; methods for determining a length of time the blood has been in the cerebrospinal fluid sample; and methods for rapidly obtaining a differential diagnosis between conditions indicated by blood in the cerebral spinal fluid. Moreover, the present invention provides instruments capable of rapidly assessing a condition in and individual by point-of-care analysis of a cerebral fluid sample from an individual.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08027814&OS=08027814&RS=08027814
owner: University of Cincinnati
number: 08027814
owner_city: Cincinnati
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050801
---
This application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 592 502 filed Jul. 30 2004.

This invention was made at least in part with funds from the Federal Government awarded through grants numbered R01 HL67186 R01 NS042308 and R21 NS4697. The U.S. Government therefore has certain acknowledged rights to the invention.

The present invention is directed toward methods for assessing a condition in an individual by analyzing a cerebrospinal fluid sample from an individual for example by spectroscopy. Further the invention is directed towards methods for determining an amount of blood in the cerebrospinal fluid sample methods for determining concentrations of analytes in the cerebrospinal fluid sample and methods for determining a length of time the blood has been in the cerebrospinal fluid sample. Moreover the present invention provides an instrument capable of rapidly assessing a condition in and individual by point of care analysis of a cerebral fluid sample from an individual.

A cerebral aneurysm is a weakened and diseased portion of an artery in the brain. When a cerebral aneurysm ruptures the brain is bathed in blood and a specific type of bleeding known as a subarachnoid hemorrhage SAH occurs. Approximately fifty percent of patients die immediately after an aneurysm ruptures and no test exists currently to screen people for the presence of a cerebral aneurysm. The diagnosis of a SAH is made only after an aneurysm ruptures and the literature indicates that 23 51 of patients with a SAH are originally misdiagnosed with the average delay in diagnosis being 6 days. At present clinicians do not possess the diagnostic modalities sufficient for assessing patients with a suspected ruptured cerebral aneurysm and a normal computerized tomography CT scan.

In patients with a suspected SAH and a negative CT scan the performance of a lumbar puncture LP is strongly recommended. Typically a needle is used to sample the fluid surrounding the spinal cord in LP. Collected from the patient s lumbar spine the cerebrospinal fluid communicates with the fluid around the brain and is tainted with blood after an aneurysm ruptures. In other words the presence of blood in the CSF raises the possibility of a SAH. The difficulty with the performance of a spinal tap is that nearly 1 in 5 of these procedures results in a traumatic tap . This term implies the needle used for collection of the CSF penetrated a blood vessel in the patient s back prior to entering the space where the CSF is found. In these circumstances part of the sample is the patient s CSF and a portion is from a blood vessel in the muscle bone or a ligament of the spine. At present no test can reliably identify the source of blood in CSF and differentiate a SAH from a traumatic spinal tap. A correct diagnosis is critical to directing patients toward repair of their cerebral aneurysm before another rupture occurs.

About 2 million people in the United States are thought to harbor a cerebral aneurysm while an SAH affects 30 000 people per year. To detect a small or sentinel SAH CSF analysis should be rapid and sensitive. Likewise the specificity of CSF analysis is crucial and the misinterpretation of a traumatic spinal tap as a SAH may lead to the treatment of an un ruptured aneurysm. If the CSF contains zero or very few red blood cells a diagnosis of SAH is extremely unlikely. The difficulty arises when large numbers of red blood cells RBC s are found. At present no method of CSF analysis has the ability to fully direct a patient s care.

A key concept to the differentiation of a SAH from a traumatic tap is the identification of a marker for SAH. The measurement of CSF bilirubin if collected 12 hours after the onset of symptoms can distinguish between a SAH and a traumatic spinal tap. Furthermore the production of bilirubin occurs over a predictable time course and can be detected following a low volume SAH. Effectively the presence of elevated CSF bilirubin excludes the diagnosis of a traumatic tap. Hence methods are needed for rapidly assessing a condition of elevated CSF bilirubin in an individual suspected of having suffered from an SAH.

The determination of blood in the CSF is frequently done simply with a visual inspection for xanthochromia a discoloration of the CSF indicating the presence of blood. This subjective and low sensitivity technique cannot determine the amount of blood in the CSF or the degradative processes that have acted on the blood. Nor can this visual inspection estimate the amount of time the blood has been in the CSF. The results of visual interpretation of spectra are qualitative in nature and depend strongly on the experience of the technicians results therefore are prone to large inter and intra individual variation. Thus there exists a substantial need for improved methods for analyzing blood in the CSF to assess a condition such as a hemorrhage and methods are needed which objectively quantify spectral output and do not depend on the skills of the technician.

Similar needs existed and were developed in the field of diabetic study to quantify glucose in blood. In measurements of blood glucose the doctors withdraw some quantity of blood and analyze it. To extract the glucose information in the presence of other constituents spectral analysis is performed where different physiological components produce spectral signals. The main idea is to separate the glucose signals from the other dominating signals in the spectra. There have been a number of ways to find a solution for this problem using mathematical algorithms. These include for example the methods of principal components regression PCR partial least squares PLS and artificial neural networks ANN .

Performance reliability and validity of the signal processing is very dependent on the quality of the data. The PLS and the ANN algorithmic models are not always dependable because they are sensitive to the changes in time and the resultant variance in data that varies with the concentration of the solution. Moreover given their complexity they are more appropriate to implement when multiple variables need to be predicted. Other work has concentrated on using pattern recognition algorithms to extract the respective signals. It has been reported that derivative analysis of the absorption or transmittance spectra can be a useful tool in drastically improving the selectivity of a bilirubin in a mixed component sample. Others have tried to use an extension to the above model by characterizing the absorbance transmittance curves by Gaussian peaks and then applying the first derivative algorithm. The problem with this work is that the results have been obtained in very diluted samples that are not physiologically achievable and hence have no application to assessment of a condition in an individual by subjecting fluid samples drawn from the individual to those analyses. Recent research has concentrated on the first and the second order derivative applications on the spectral signals of bilirubin and other components to analyze patterns that reflect changes that can be used in analysis. Also other mathematical algorithms like logarithmic ratios of signals are compared to extract the wanted component. None of the above work has been applied to describe aneurysm models or SAH models.

Accordingly it is an object of the present invention to provide physicians with a tool to accurately diagnose patients with a suspected SAH and to provide point of care technology that will allow completion of the diagnostic paradigm using a point of care measurement of bilirubin. The present invention also provides a standardized method for the spectrophotometric examination of CSF which yields reliable quantitative results. The detection of a SAH can be accomplished using the characteristic spectral absorption patterns for blood s breakdown products with the blood product of interest referred to herein as an analyte.

Accordingly the present invention provides methods for assessing conditions in an individual comprising the steps of obtaining a cerebrospinal fluid sample from an individual and analyzing the blood in the cerebrospinal fluid sample. Specific embodiments are directed to methods wherein the blood is analyzed by a spectrophotometer which generates an output signal which may be represented in the form of a spectral absorption curve over certain significant wavelength ranges. Very specific embodiments are directed to methods comprising very specific wavelength ranges.

A further embodiment provides methods for estimating a concentration of an analyte in a fluid comprised of the analyte and a contaminant. Optionally EDTA may be added to the fluid. The method comprises a using a spectrophotometer to generate at least one standard spectral absorption curve for the analyte and b for the contaminant c computing a sum spectral absorption curve for the fluid by adding the spectral absorptions curves for the analyte and contaminant d comparing the spectral absorption curves of the analyte and contaminant to determine wavelength ranges wherein the analyte dominates and wherein the contaminant dominates e obtaining a sample of the fluid and generating a measured spectral absorption curve of the sample over each of those wavelength ranges f computing a scaling factor for both the wavelength range where the analyte dominates for the wavelength range where the contaminant dominates and applying the scaling factors to generate a scaled spectral absorption curve of the fluid g optionally generating at least one interpolative curve from the standard spectral absorption curves of the analyte and contaminant h using a modified minimum distance algorithm to select which standard contaminant spectral absorption curve of the contaminant is closest in distance to the scaled spectral curve over the wavelength range where the contaminant dominates i computing a residual curve from this over all measured wavelengths j using a modified minimum distance algorithm to select which standard analyte spectral absorption curve is closest in distance to the residual curve over the wavelength range where the analyte dominates k computing a new residual curve from this over all measured wavelengths and l iteratively repeating these steps until a standard contaminant curve and a standard analyte curve are selected in consecutive iterations.

A further embodiment is directed to methods for estimating a concentration of an analyte in a fluid comprised of the analyte and a contaminant where the method comprises a using a spectrophotometer to generate a standard spectral absorption curve at each of at least two known concentrations of the analyte and at each of at least two known concentrations of the contaminant b computing a first derivative curve of those standard spectral absorption curves c inspecting the first derivative curve of the contaminant to determine a significant wavelength range wherein an average value of the first derivative curve over that range approximates zero d using a spectrophotometer to generate a standard spectral absorption curve for each of at least two samples of the fluid over the significant wavelength range wherein each sample of the fluid comprises a different known concentration of the analyte and a known fixed concentration of the contaminant e generating a first derivative curve for each of the standard spectral absorption curves so generated and computing an average value of the first derivative for each of the at least two samples of the fluid over the significant wavelength range f generating a curve by plotting the different known concentrations of the analyte versus the average values of the first derivatives over the significant wavelength range g fitting a polynomial equation to the resulting curve h obtaining a sample of the fluid generating a spectral absorption curve over the significant wavelength range computing a value for the average first derivative over the significant wavelength range plugging the value into the polynomial equation wherein the resulting value is the estimated concentration of the analyte in the sample of the fluid.

In another embodiment of methods directed to estimating a concentration of an analyte in a fluid comprised of the analyte and a contaminant and optionally EDTA the method comprises a formulating at least two mock CSF compositions wherein each mock CSF composition has a different known concentration of the analyte and the contaminant b generating a spectral absorption curve for each mock CSF composition c generating an average mock CSF absorption spectral curve wherein the curve has a shape d determining a first wavelength range wherein both the analyte and the contaminant contribute significantly to the shape of the absorption curve e determining a second wavelength range wherein contribution to the shape of the absorption curve by the analyte is minimal. f plotting concentrations of the contaminant versus mean of absorbance across the second wavelength range and using linear regression to generate a contaminant regression model g generating an analyte regression model over the first wavelength collecting a sample of CSF having unknown concentrations of analyte and contaminant h generating a spectral absorption curve for the sample of CSF i determining an estimated concentration of the contaminant using the contaminant regression model and j entering the estimated concentration of the contaminant into the analyte regression model to generate an estimated concentration of the analyte.

The invention also provides an embodiment directed to an instrument for rapidly assessing a condition of an individual by estimating a concentration of an analyte in a body fluid of the individual. The instrument comprises a device for analyzing a body fluid of the individual wherein the device receives a sample of the body fluid and generates an output signal and a processor which subjects the output signal to an algorithm which yields an estimated value of the concentration of the analyte.

The present invention is advantageous for objectively assessing a condition based upon analyzing the blood in the cerebrospinal fluid sample. Additional embodiments objects and advantages of the invention will become more fully apparent in view of the following figures and detailed description.

The present invention contemplates the use of spectrophotometers. This technology is based on firmly established and well understood optical principles. Spectrophotometry is a technique used for the detection of various molecular or chemical species present in a solution when performing fluid solution analysis. It involves the measurement of light absorbed in a fluid solution by analyzing information on the absorbance transmittance of various compounds at discrete wavelengths. The basic function of a spectrophotometer is to calculate the absorbance transmittance of light for specific solution. The primary factor responsible for the operation of a spectrophotometer is how well it absorbs light at certain wavelengths. When the transition energy of a molecule matches the incident photon energy at a particular wavelength it results in a process of absorption. This produces an electron excitation from a lower orbital state to a higher orbital state. The variation of absorption transmission with wavelength is very helpful for the characterization and quantization of various biological and chemical species. Detection of the type of compound is determined by comparing the measured spectra to the reference curves. Bilirubin and hemoglobin have maximum absorbance in the UV to visible range regions.

Absorbance is the basic criterion for determining the concentration changes but the measuring parameter is transmittance. Therefore in most spectrophotometric experiments only the transmittance is measured and converted into absorbance. To reduce error readings only the absorption at peak wavelengths are considered. In CSF analysis the wavelength range from 350 to 600 nm is scanned to obtain an entire range of spectra for a specific concentration.

Spectroscopic analysis of human spinal fluid may be diagnostic of hemorrhagic stroke trauma and traumatic spinal tap. Those skilled in the art will be familiar with related applications of this technology to embodiments including but not limited to the diagnosis of infection meningitis and neurodegeneration. Accordingly the inventors have determined a method for objectively analyzing blood in a CSF sample. Within the scope of the present specification analyzing means determining quantitative characteristics i.e. not merely determining qualitatively the presence or absence of blood in the CSF. Thus analyzing includes determining the amount of blood in the CSF the relative concentrations of metabolites herein referred to as analytes when subject to analysis in the CSF and or the length of time the blood has been in the CSF among other quantitative determinations. Practioners of the art will appreciate that the metabolites of blood include inter alia bilirubin and hemoglobin and that hemoglobin is comprised of some ratio of methemoglobin oxyhemeglobin and deoxyhemeglobin.

Specifically the detection of an SAH can be accomplished using the characteristic spectral absorption patterns for blood s breakdown products. A model of SAH based on these breakdown products has been created and certain spectrophotometric analytical techniques applied. In one embodiment a modified minimum distance algorithm is used for estimating bilirubin in CSF which accounted for biological interactions from the spectrographic data. The current invention also provides a derivative analysis method for analyzing the spectrographic data.

The concentration of bilirubin in CSF SAH is significant to differential diagnosis of an SAH. A low level of bilirubin indicates that a patient does not suffer from a ruptured cerebral aneurysm. Beyond 1 mg dL the patient may be classified with a probable case of SAH. The moderate region is the critical region since it will determine whether or not a patient is classified as suffering from SAH. Beyond 4 mg dL of bilirubin a patient is certain of having a ruptured cerebral aneurysm SAH and beyond 6 mg dL indicates a critical condition.

The invention is directed to methods for assessing a condition in an individual. The methods comprise the steps of obtaining a cerebrospinal fluid sample from an individual and analyzing the blood in the cerebrospinal fluid sample. The condition is thereby assessed. One skilled in the art will appreciate the various conditions which may be assessed by analyzing CSF. The conditions include but are not limited to stroke head injury hemorrhage including subarachnoid hemorrhage surgical complications including traumatic spinal tap arterial malformation venous malformations tumor or a combination thereof. In one embodiment the course of therapy for the condition is assessed. In another embodiment a therapy for the condition is designed.

One skilled in the art will appreciate that there are many methods for analyzing blood in a CSF sample any of which may be employed herein. In one embodiment the blood in a CSF sample is measured by a spectrophotometer. Moreover one skilled in the art will appreciate that a spectrophotometer generates an output signal over a spectral wavelength range which may be constructed into an absorption versus wavelength curve herein referred to as a spectral absorption curve. A spectrophotometer may generate the output signal over many different wavelength ranges and one skilled in the art will appreciate that there are many wavelength ranges relevant to measuring the blood in a CSF sample any of which may be employer herein. In one embodiment the spectroscopic wavelength range is from 350 to 650 nm. In a further embodiment the spectroscopic wavelength range is from about 450 to about 500 nm or from about 390 to about 420 nm or both. In yet another embodiment the wavelength range is from about 486 to about 523 nm.

The analysis of the CSF sample may be used to determine the concentration of analytes and or contaminants in the sample. One skilled in the art will appreciate the various analytes which are found and may be measured in the CSF sample. Further one skilled in the art will appreciate the various methods for measuring analytes in a CSF sample any of which may be employed herein. In one embodiment the analytes in the CSF sample to be analyzed comprise methemoglobin oxyhemoglobin bilirubin or a combination thereof. In a very specific embodiment bilirubin is an analyte and methemoglobin is a contaminant. In a further embodiment the analytes are analyzed by spectroscopy. In another embodiment the concentration of methemoglobin oxyhemoglobin bilirubin or a combination thereof is determined from a mathematical algorithm applied to the spectral absorption data. In specific embodiments the mathematical algorithm comprises a linear regression algorithm a modified minimum distance algorithm a first or second derivative algorithm or some combination thereof.

The modified minimum distance method is based on the assumption that a spectral absorption curve of a fluid is merely the sum of its component spectral absorption curves. For example CSF SAH would be the sum of methemoglobin and bilirubin. However due to presence of proteins lipids and other blood components as well as the inherent non linearity present in the mixing of two fluids SAH is actually a complex non linear summation of methemoglobin and bilirubin. Over small ranges of concentration levels of methemoglobin and bilirubin and over specific wavelength regions SAH may be approximated as their linear sum by the use of scale factors.

The scale factors vary and depend on the concentration levels of bilirubin and methemoglobin. Only over small concentration regions of bilirubin and methemoglobin can one set of scale factors and be chosen. Broader ranges of analyte concentration may require the implementation of multiple scaling factors. One skilled in the art will appreciate the multiple analytes and combinations of scaling factors that may apply thereto. Wavelength regions are chosen for each constituent where its spectrum is dominant and thus provides a high SNR. After computing the appropriate scale factors for the data the algorithm computes methemoglobin by the minimum distance method choosing the methemoglobin curve which provides the closest fit among a database of such curves at various concentrations and subtracts that from the original SAH data and then computes the bilirubin value by choosing the bilirubin curve which provides the closest fit amongst curves at all concentration of bilirubin. The process goes on iteratively until it converges to some methemoglobin curve and bilirubin curve. It has been found that the algorithm provides better estimate of bilirubin in SAH than methemoglobin since the bilirubin spectrum provides higher SNR over the 450 nm to 500 nm wavelength region at all concentration levels.

One inventive method embodiment employs the minimum distance algorithm to estimate a concentration of an analyte in a fluid comprised of the analyte and a contaminant. The method comprises a using a spectrophotometer to generate at least one standard spectral absorption curve for the analyte b using a spectrophotometer to generate at least one standard spectral absorption curve for the contaminant c computing a sum spectral absorption curve F for the fluid by adding the spectral absorptions curves generated in steps a and b d comparing the spectral absorption curves generated in steps a and b to determine a wavelength range wherein the analyte dominates and a wavelength region wherein the contaminant dominates e obtaining a sample of the fluid and generating a measured spectral absorption curve F of the sample over each wavelength range determined in step d f computing a scaling factor for the wavelength range where the anlayte dominates and computing a scaling factor for the wavelength range where the contaminant dominates and applying the scaling factors such that a scaled spectral absorption curve of the fluid F results and F F over the wavelength range where the analyte dominates and F F over the wavelength range where the contaminant dominates g optionally generating at least one interpolative curve from the standard spectral absorption curves generated in steps a and b h using a modified minimum distance algorithm to select which standard contaminant spectral absorption curve of the contaminant is closest in distance to Fover the wavelength range where the contaminant dominates i computing a residual curve over all measured wavelengths j using a modified minimum distance algorithm to select which standard analyte spectral absorption curve is closest in distance to the residual curve over the wavelength range where the analyte dominates k computing a new residual curve over all measured wavelengths and l iteratively repeating steps h k until a standard contaminant curve and a standard analyte curve are selected in consecutive iterations.

In an additional aspects of this method embodiment the fluid comprises cerebral spinal fluid. In a further aspects the analyte comprises bilirubin and or the contaminant comprises methemoglobin. In additional aspects the wavelength range where the bilirubin dominates is from about 450 to about 500 nm and the wavelength range where the methemoglobin dominates is from about 390 to about 420 nm.

The modified minimum distance method has relatively high computation requirements. Well over a hundred standard curves of bilirubin and methemoglobin over a given wavelength range may need to be generated. For the algorithm to be effective over a wide range of bilirubin and methemoglobin concentration a large number of standard curves need to made available while running it.

Derivative spectral analysis of the absorption spectra is useful to improve the selectivity of spectrophotometric determination in multiple components sample and reduces the computational requirements. One of the major advantages of applying the first spectral derivative analysis technique is that it diminishes the background absorbance in the sample contributed by proteins lipids and other blood components which do not have significant absorption peaks within the wavelength of interest. Another important advantage of the derivative spectral analysis technique is that it can separate two overlapping spectra with somewhat Gaussian like peaks quite effectively. Fortunately the spectral characteristics of bilirubin and methemoglobin do match to some extent the above stated requirements of derivative spectral analysis.

An additional method embodiment employs the derivative analysis algorithm for estimating a concentration of an analyte in a fluid comprised of the analyte and a contaminant. The method comprises a using a spectrophotometer to generate a standard spectral absorption curve at each of at least two known concentrations of the analyte and at each of at least two known concentrations of the contaminant b computing a first derivative curve of the standard spectral absorption curves generated in a c inspecting the first derivative curve of the contaminant to determine a wavelength range wherein an average value of the first derivative curve over that range approximates zero d using a spectrophotometer to generate a standard spectral absorption curve for each of at least two samples of the fluid over the wavelength range determined in step c wherein each sample of the fluid comprises a different known concentration of the analyte and a known fixed concentration of the contaminant e generating a first derivative curve for each of the standard spectral absorption curves generated in step d and computing an average value of the first derivative for each of the at least two samples of the fluid over the wavelength range determined in step c f generating a curve by plotting the different known concentrations of the analyte from step d versus the average values of the first derivatives from step e g fitting a polynomial equation to the curve generated in step f wherein the polynomial comprises coefficients h obtaining a sample of the fluid using a spectrophotometer to generate a spectral absorption curve over the wavelength range determined in step c computing a value for the average first derivative over the wavelength range plugging that value into the polynomial equation from step g wherein the result is the estimated concentration of the substance in the sample of the fluid.

Additional aspects are directed to embodiments utilizing the derivative analysis algorithm wherein the fluid comprises cerebral spinal fluid. Further aspects are directed to this method embodiment wherein 33 wherein the analyte comprises bilirubin and or the contaminant comprises methemoglobin. In other aspects the significant wavelength range is from about 486 to about 524 nm.

An additional embodiment employs a statistically based algorithm to process the signal output to substantially resolve the signal noise separation problem between in a spectral analysis of a composition comprising analyte generates signal and contaminant generates noise . This method is based on the premise that a statistical relationship exists between the shape of the sum absorbance curve and the respective concentrations of analyte and contaminant. Hence once the shape of the absorbance curve and the concentration of contaminant are known the concentration of analyte can be determined from that relationship. First a data set from standard body fluid solutions of known concentrations of analyte and contaminant are created. In addition different measurements for known concentrations of a sample are analyzed to predict the instrument and human error to incorporate into the algorithm. A spectrophotometer is used to generate an output signal for the varying known concentrations and standard CSF. A first wavelength range is chosen so that the spectral absorbance curves of both the analyte and contaminant actively contribute and a second wavelength range is chosen where only one of the two is significant. The algorithmic step is used to estimate the contaminant concentration by considering the contribution of the analyte to the standard body fluid absorption spectrum as a bias in the defined range. A least squares linear fit is obtained between the concentration of contaminant and the average value of the absorption of standard body fluid over the first wavelength range. A linear regression for the contaminant is calculated. Then the analyte concentration in the second wavelength range is estimated. The standard body fluid absorbance spectra is the input into the contaminant regression model and the output is an estimated contaminant concentration value. The estimated contaminant concentration value and the standard body fluid absorbance value are the input into the analyte regression model and the final output is the estimated value of analyte.

The linear regression model provides a further method for estimating a concentration of an analyte in a fluid comprised of the analyte and a contaminant and optionally EDTA. One embodiment of the method comprises a formulating at least two mock CSF compositions wherein each mock CSF composition has a different known concentration of the analyte and the contaminant b generating a spectral absorption curve for each mock CSF composition c generating an average mock CSF absorption spectral curve wherein the curve has a shape d determining a first wavelength range wherein both the analyte and the contaminant contribute significantly to the shape of the absorption curve e determining a second wavelength range wherein contribution to the shape of the absorption curve by the analyte is minimal. f plotting concentrations of the contaminant versus mean of absorbance across the second wavelength range and using linear regression to generate a contaminant regression model g generating an analyte regression model over the first wavelength collecting a sample of CSF having unknown concentrations of analyte and contaminant h generating a spectral absorption curve for the sample of CSF i determining an estimated concentration of the contaminant using the contaminant regression model and j entering the estimated concentration of the contaminant into the analyte regression model to generate an estimated concentration of the analyte.

Additional specific embodiments employing the linear regression analysis algorithm are also provided. In a specific embodiment the fluid comprises cerebral spinal fluid. In more specific embodiments the analyte comprises bilirubin and or the contaminant comprises methemoglobin. In very specific embodiments the first wavelength range is from about 450 to about 500 nm and or the second wavelength range is from about 500 to about 600 nm.

The presence of bilirubin in the CSF relies upon the production of the heat shock protein heme oxygenase 1 HO 1 . Detection of elevated bilirubin in CSF is an indicator of erythrocyte catabolism and a robust mechanism for differentiating an SAH from a traumatic spinal tap. Bilirubin production has been determined to require 12 hours. This time lag is likely caused by induction of HO 1 and is not problematic clinically because it occurs during the ultra sensitive phase of a CT scan s ability to detect an SAH. The bilirubin production lag provides the value of analyzing bilirubin concentrations as indicators of an SAH. Blood introduced during a traumatic tap will not have sufficient time for the catabolic conversion to bilirubin.

A potential pitfall in the clinical usefulness of a bilirubin assay to detect an SAH is the interference caused by hemoglobin concentrations exceeding 0.28 g dL. It was discovered that the spectroscopic measurement of bilirubin is masked by the presence of hemoglobin. This masking is not due to noise of the hemoglobin signal but rather interference from the hemoglobin. The bilirubin is binding to hemoglobin and that this binding alters bilirubin s spectroscopic absorbance characteristics. These binding properties cause the spectral curve of bilirubin when added to hemoglobin to be non linearly dependent upon the concentration of hemoglobin. This discovery is unexpected because hemoglobin has never been found to be a bilirubin binding protein. The specific binding of bilirubin drastically alters the precision with which the state of the art technologies can detect and quantify bilirubin. The binding constants may be used to optimize and improve the algorithm. Without incorporating these binding constants into an algorithm calculation one would produce a systematic error with state of the art technologies. One embodiment of the invention utilizes a chemical to increase the threshold thereby enhancing the output signal. A more specific embodiment of the present inventive methods utilizes an EDTA extraction to enhance the signal. It will be apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art that other chelating agents and chemicals may be selected to provide a similar enhancing effect and the present inventive methods should not be construed as limited to the selection of EDTA.

Studies have determined that bilirubin s concentration depends upon the initial volume of hemorrhage. In addition the concentration of bilirubin in the CSF increases with time. Together these two aspects of metabolism may allow identification of both the volume and timing of an SAH.

The analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid sample therefore may be used to determine a length of time the blood has been in the cerebrospinal fluid. In one embodiment the length of time the blood has been in the cerebrospinal fluid correlates with the concentration of analytes in the cerebrospinal fluid sample. One skilled in the art will appreciate the various assessment which may made based upon the length of time the blood has been in the cerebrospinal fluid any of which may be employed herein.

The analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid sample may also be used to determine the amount of blood in the cerebrospinal fluid sample. The determination of the amount of blood in the cerebrospinal fluid sample may be used as a correlation of the severity of the condition.

The method of assessing a condition in an individual may further comprise the step of obtaining sequential cerebrospinal fluid samples from the individual. These sequential samples may be used to assess severity of the condition or efficacy of treatments.

One inventive embodiment is directed to an instrument for rapidly assessing a condition of an individual by estimating a concentration of an analyte in a body fluid of the individual. The instrument comprises a device for analyzing a body fluid of the individual wherein the device receives a sample of the body fluid and generates an output signal and a processor which subjects the output signal to an algorithm which yields an estimated value of the concentration of the analyte.

In more specific aspects of this embodiment the algorithm comprises a linear regression algorithm a modified minimum distance algorithm a derivative analysis algorithm or some combination thereof. In a very specific embodiment the algorithm comprises a derivative analysis algorithm. In another very specific embodiment the algorithm comprises a modified minimum distance algorithm and in a further very specific embodiment the algorithm comprises a linear regression algorithm. In other specific embodiments the body fluid comprises cerebral spinal fluid. In a more specific embodiment the condition assessed is whether the patient has suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage. In a further embodiment the analyte is bilirubin. In one embodiment the instrument is portable.

The specific embodiments in the examples described herein are illustrative in nature only and are not intended to be limiting of the claimed compositions methods or articles. Additional embodiments and variations within the scope of the claimed invention will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art in view of the present disclosure.

This example illustrates the use of the inventive methods to perform a differential diagnosis the spectrophotometer output provides the spectral content of the CSF obtained from LP. Generally due to the rupture of a blood vessel while performing LP the spectral content would consist of hemoglobin and bilirubin. The hemoglobin consists of two different components oxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin. However within a short period of time the oxy hemoglobin gets converted into methemoglobin. Therefore the primary objective is to detect the presence of bilirubin in CSF SAH. In addition to bilirubin the concentration of which depends on the extent of aneurysm rupture CSF SAH may have methemoglobin and certain other proteins in it. A measured spectral output for SAH was generated and CSF SAH with two different concentrations of bilirubin were plotted. It was observed that absorption increased over all wavelength ranges for the higher bilirubin concentration but was more pronounced in the region between 450 and 500 nm.

Since the CSF SAH data consists of methemoglobin and bilirubin analysis of their individual spectra is essential in finding a detection procedure for bilirubin. The individual spectra of methemoglobin and bilirubin in saline were obtained from spectrophotometer analysis. The absorption of bilirubin was found to be much higher than methemoglobin between the wavelength regions of 450 500 nm while the absorption of methemoglobin dominated over bilirubin over the wavelength region 390 420 nm. These differences provide a basis for differentiating between bilirubin and methemoglobin in CSF SAH. Pre measured spectral curves of bilirubin and methemoglobin in saline were generated at different concentrations. Those curves formed the basis for estimating the concentrations of bilirubin and methemoglobin in the laboratory measured sample of CSF SAH.

This example illustrates the calculation of scaling factors in the development of the minimum distance method algorithm employed in some embodiments of the inventive methods.

The performance of the algorithm depends on the ability to describe the measured SAH spectrum accurately as the linear combination of pre measured bilirubin and methemoglobin spectra over the wavelengths of significance i.e. between 390 and 420 nm and 450 to 600 nm. Therefore over a certain set of wavelengths in the spectral data we adjust the SAH curve with a scale factor SAH 390 n 420 1 SAH 450 n 500 2 where and are scaling factors which are computed by minimizing the least squares LS error functions SAH 390 n 420 3 SAH 450 n 500 4 such that the scaled SAH curve and the sum curve are nearly equal over the wavelengths indicated.

A set of solutions is prepared in which methemoglobin is constant at 4.6 g dL in each but bilirubin is varied from 0 to 9 mg dL. The optimum scale factors for each set of concentrations is determined. Actual scale factors are calculated at each concentration over the wavelengths of significance and the average value of the scale factors in different wavelength regions are calculated to use in the program to reduce the amount of computation. The optimum scaling factors for different concentrations of bilirubin change as the concentration of methemoglobin changes. Hence the scaling factors and at different concentrations of bilirubin and methemoglobin need to be computed initially so as to produce minimum error with laboratory data. These scaling factors once generated would then be used as described in 1 and 2 . The generation of scaling factors at different concentrations of methemoglobin and bilirubin can be described by a Bilirubin Methemoglobin B M concentration plane which is a grid array of increasing concentrations of bilirubin versus increasing concentrations of methemoglobin with the corresponding scale factor pairs in each grid of the array representing different concentration regions. refer to a Fig. 

While shows the bilirubin methemoglobin B M concentration plane divided into regular square regions each with its own set of scale factors in reality the partitioning of the B M plane for the optimum scale factors may not produce such regular regions. While performing simulations with test data the scale factors of the shaded region in the center of the B M plane are the ones chosen initially. This means the initial assumption is that the bilirubin methemoglobin concentration lies within this region. Using the scale factors corresponding to this region the algorithm is used to form estimates of the concentration of methemoglobin and bilirubin in an SAH sample. However after one iteration of the algorithm the results may lead us away from the center grid of the B M plane. For example the computed bilirubin and methemoglobin concentrations may place it in the and region of the B M plane and not the center and region as initially assumed. Hence the algorithm is invoked again but uses and as the new scaling factors. The process is continued until the bilirubin and methemoglobin concentration converges to a specific grid on the B M plane. All the scale factors on the B M plane as shown in are pre computed using the method as described in 3 and 4 and shown in . Partitioning the B M plane into greater number of grid regions could lead to higher accuracy at a higher computational cost.

This example provides results of estimating bilirubin and methemoglobin in a measured CSF SAH solution using the minimum distance method.

First M n and B n were estimated in a sample with constant methemoglobin and increasing bilirubin. Spectral curves for 36 different concentrations of methemoglobin and bilirubin were measured in the laboratory 105 additional curves were interpolated from those as discussed previously. The methemoglobin concentration was held constant at 4.6 g dL while the bilirubin concentration was increased from 0 mg dL to 9 mg dL. The bilirubin concentrations were not uniformly distributed over the entire concentration range. Since the lower and middle levels on the concentration scale are more critical in terms of diagnosis of SAH the number of concentrations of bilirubin measured in this region is higher. This helps us test the algorithm more rigorously over the critical concentrations of bilirubin.

The results indicate that the estimation error for bilirubin is lower than that of methemoglobin. The magnitude of absorption in the region between 390 and 420 nm increases strongly for bilirubin with increasing concentration. This region is therefore used for estimating methemoglobin by the minimum distance method. However the scaling factor equation becomes less exact as the concentration of bilirubin increases and exhibits considerable absorption over 390 420 nm which leads to lower methemoglobin estimates than their true value. A lower estimate of methemoglobin leads to a higher estimate of bilirubin than its true value. However this is no reason for concern. Bilirubin levels beyond 6 mg dL represents a critical condition. From the figures we find that significant error in bilirubin estimation occurs beyond 6.6 mg dL using the algorithm on this set of laboratory data. Consequently the bilirubin estimate is higher than its true value of 6.6 mg dL and we would still classify the patient as being in a critical state. At a lower concentration of bilirubin when accurate estimation of bilirubin level is much more critical for diagnosis of a SAH condition the algorithm produces negligible error and is highly accurate. A second set of results of estimating bilirubin and methemoglobin in CSF SAH solution using the minimum distance method were produced. Again 141 spectral curves were used 36 measured 105 interpolated . Unlike the previous example the bilirubin concentration is held constant at 4.6 mg dL in all SAH samples while the methemoglobin concentration is increased from 0 mg dL to 9 mg dL. With increasing concentration the absorption by methemoglobin in the wavelength region 450 500 nm does not exhibit any considerable increase. Hence an increasing concentration of methemoglobin does not have a detrimental effect on estimating bilirubin. The estimation error for bilirubin is lower than that of methemoglobin. The largest error in methemoglobin estimation is 1.5 g dL which is still much lower than that of the previous case. The maximum error in bilirubin estimation is 0.6 mg dL.

This example illustrates how methods comprising the modified minimum distance algorithm are used to estimate the amount of methemoglobin and bilirubin in a measured SAH sample.

A set of standard curves at various concentrations of methemoglobin and bilirubin were produced using the spectrometer experimental setup. These standard curves are used as quantization levels for estimating the bilirubin or methemoglobin values in a CSF SAH sample. An interpolation method was used to generate additional curves from the standard spectral curves produced in the laboratory. A higher number of curves provide a larger number of quantization levels which results in greater accuracy in determining the methemoglobin and bilirubin concentration levels even though the interpolated curves may not be as accurate as additional measured curves. In this regard thirty six standard curves at different concentration of bilirubin and methemoglobin in saline were produced in the laboratory. Additional spectral curves were generated to improve the resolution of the algorithm by interpolating three new curves between each adjacent pair of original spectral curves. Since there were 36 original spectral curves both for methemoglobin and bilirubin in saline for 36 different concentrations of each 35 3 105 interpolated curves were generated thus bringing the number of possible concentrations of methemoglobin and bilirubin to 141. Generally the performance of the algorithm would be expected to be more accurate with a higher number of standard curves. However beyond a certain number of curves such as 141 in this case the gain in accuracy is often negligible compared to the effort required to produce standard concentration curves in the laboratory and the resulting increase in computations.

This example illustrates the application of the inventive methods to the problem of differentially diagnosing a subarachnoid hemorrhage from a traumatic spinal tap. Use of methods comprising the step of processing signal output using the derivative algorithm is specifically illustrated.

The first step involves obtaining CSF from the patient. The fluid is then analyzed using the spectrophotometer and an output signal is generated.

The spectrophotometer output provides an absorption spectral curve of the CSF obtained from LP. Generally due to the rupture of a blood vessel while performing LP the spectral content would consist of hemoglobin and bilirubin. The hemoglobin consists of two different components oxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin. However within a short period of time the oxyhemoglobin gets converted into methemoglobin. Therefore the primary objective is to detect the presence of bilirubin in CSF SAH. In addition to bilirubin the concentration of which depends on the extent of aneurysm rupture CSF SAH may have methemoglobin and certain other proteins in it. A measured spectral output for SAH with two different concentrations of bilirubin was plotted. It was observed that absorption increases over all wavelength ranges for the higher bilirubin concentration but is more pronounced in the region between 450 and 500 nm.

Absorption spectra of methemoglobin and bilirubin at concentration levels of 2.2 g dl and 0.6 mg dl were generated. The peak of methemoglobin absorption occurs around 413 nm while that of bilirubin occurs at 460 nm. The first derivative of the absorption spectral curves was calculated and it was observed that the first zero crossing of the Methemoglobin data occurs around 413 nm remains negative for a while and then almost steadily fluctuates around the zero axis from 460 nm onwards. Around 460 nm the first zero crossing of bilirubin data occurs which remains negative until 536 nm. In the region from 460 nm and 536 nm while the derivative of bilirubin data remains negative methemoglobin fluctuates about zero. Thus this region may be used quantitatively to estimate the bilirubin concentration.

The second derivative of the bilirubin and methemoglobin absorption spectral curves was also calculated. In addition the ratio of bilirubin and methemoglobin over the entire wavelength region using the absorption spectrum was calculated along with its first derivative and second derivative. The ratio is referred to as a signal to noise ratio SNR in this case since bilirubin levels may be considered as the signal and the methemoglobin is the noise which tends to dominate the signal. The wavelength regions of positive SNR are significant. Since higher values of SNR may be considered analogous to better estimation of bilirubin the first derivative data was deemed to be the most promising as it exhibited reasonably high SNR levels over considerable wavelength regions. The actual absorption spectrum of both of these analytes seems to be least promising with the lowest SNR values.

Absorption spectral curves of solutions containing both methemoglobin and bilirubin were generated. The methemoglobin concentration remains constant in the 36 different solutions while the bilirubin concentration varies from 0 mg dl to 9 mg dl. The absorbance spectra shows that with increasing concentration of bilirubin the absorbance increases over the entire wavelength region of 350 600 nm though non linearly. The region of most significant increase is between 450 nm and 500 nm while beyond 525 nm the increase in absorbance is insignificant. However its is not possible to develop a calibration scale using the data since with increase in concentration the absorption of methemoglobin also increases over a similar wavelength region.

This example illustrates several characteristics of the production of bilirubin from hemoglobin by HO 1 and specifically illustrates that the clinical usefulness of the bilirubin assay to detect an SAH is enhanced by diminishing the interference caused by hemoglobin concentrations exceeding 0.28 g dL. The example demonstrates that the threshold can be increased to 0.6 g dL with EDTA hemoglobin extraction. A commercially available assay for bilirubin exists and was modified to reduce interference from hemoglobin. The in vitro production of bilirubin was examined in a system containing blood CSF and rat choroid plexus as the tissue source for HO 1. In vivo experimentation consisted of both rat and porcine experimental models of SAH. Spectrophotometric analysis was completed by manipulation of absorption curves to reduce hemoglobin s interference and predict bilirubin concentrations from standard component curves.

Hemoglobin above 0.28 mg dL obscures bilirubin assays and consequently diminishes their clinical usefulness. Ethylenediaminete traacetic acid EDTA was used to partially extract hemoglobin. Stock hemoglobin solutions ranging from 0.15 g dL to 4.8 g dL were prepared. Concentrations of hemoglobin were measured using a commercially available hemoglobin assay prior to and after the addition of EDTA solution 1 1 volume . Similarly bilirubin solutions were prepared in concentrations ranging from 0.04 mg dL to 6.72 mg dL. Bilirubin assays were also conducted for each sample before and after EDTA extraction.

The first analysis was conducted in vitro. To examine bilirubin production CSF whole blood and a tissue source of HO 1 were combined. These materials were then incubated at 37 C. for 72 hours with serial assays for bilirubin. Each constituent was also sequentially eliminated and replaced with a volumetric control. This generated one experimental group 1 and three control groups 2 4 1 50 uL blood CSF and HO 1 2 CSF HO 1 and no blood 3 50 uL blood no CSF and HO 1 4 50 uL blood 0.9 sodium chloride and HO 1. The HO 1 was provided by choroid plexus cells harvested from un injured Sprague Dawley rats. Whole arterial blood was collected from the same Sprague Dawley rat. CSF was collected from a normal patient.

A second analysis was conducted in vivo. Rat and porcine SAH models were used for the in vivo production of bilirubin. In the rat experiments whole arterial non heparinized blood was collected from the femoral arteries of four Sprague Dawley rats. The animals were then placed into a stereotactic head frame and their cranio cervical junction dissected to expose the alanto occipital membrane. Using microsurgical technique the cisterna magna was injected with harvested autologous blood with incremental increases in the volume of blood injected 15 75 100 and 200 uL . The incisions were then sutured closed and the animals recovered. 24 hours after the injections the animals were re anesthetized and re secured in the stereotactic headframe. The alanto occipital membrane was re exposed and CSF collected from their cisterna magna. The CSF was assayed for total bilirubin.

Anesthetized Yorkshire pigs 16 20 kg were utilized for the porcine model of SAH. The cranio cervical junction was exposed in each animal and either blood or saline was injected into their cisterna magna with an 18 gauge spinal needle. In the experimental group 3 animals were injected with 250 L of arterial blood. In the control group 1 animal was injected with 250 L of 0.9 sodium chloride. For those animals in the experimental arm whole arterial non heparinized blood was obtained from their femoral artery. Prior to dissection of the cranio cervical junction the lumbar spine at the level of the L4 L5 spinous processes and lamina as well as the upper sacrum was exposed. A 22 gauge spinal needle was inserted into the lumbar cistern and CSF collected. Both the cisterna magna and lumbar cistern spinal needles were left in place. CSF was sampled prior to and every hour after the blood saline injection until 24 hours post injection. The CSF was centrifuged and hemoglobin and bilirubin concentrations were assayed. Importantly the volume of the porcine SAH 250 L is a volumetrically equivalent hemorrhage to a low volume rodent SAH described previously.

For the spectrophotometric analysis CSF from a normal patient was spiked with known concentrations of methemoglobin and bilirubin. Spectrophotometric investigation was accomplished using partial component analysis from standard absorption peaks. The spectrophotometric algorithm was interrogated for its ability to predict the hemoglobin and bilirubin concentrations.

The summary of all available data suggests bilirubin production requires 12 hours. This time lag is likely due to in the induction of HO 1. In fact bilirubin s production lag provides the value of this diagnostic modality. Blood introduced during a traumatic tap will not have sufficient time for the catabolic conversion to bilirubin. One potential pitfall in the clinical usefulness of a bilirubin assay to detect a SAH is the interference caused by hemoglobin concentrations exceeding 0.28 g dL. This threshold can be increased to 0.6 g dL with EDTA hemoglobin extraction.

The in vitro data provides evidence of the requisite constituents for bilirubin production. Elimination of CSF HO 1 or blood prevents the conversion of hemoglobin to bilirubin. This is clinically advantageous because CSF removed from a patient will no longer be in contact with the membrane bound HO 1. The in vivo data suggests two clinically applicable aspects of this methodology. First bilirubin s concentration depends upon the initial volume of hemorrhage. Secondly the concentration of bilirubin in the CSF increases with time. Together these two aspects of metabolism may allow identification of both the volume and timing of a SAH.

Total bilirubin was assayed using a method based on those developed by Michaelsson 1961 Bilirubin determination in serum and urine . Suppl. 56 13 1 and Nosslin 1960 The direct diazo reaction of bile pigments in serum . Suppl. 49 12 1 which references are incorporated by reference herein. The method was adapted for use in a microtiter plate.

Blood samples were first assayed for hemoglobin content Sigma Diagnostics procedure 525 total hemoglobin . If the sample was found to be below 300 mg dL the sample was used untreated. If the sample was above 300 mg dL but below 600 mg dL the sample was diluted 1 1 with saturated EDTA solution and centrifuged to remove 50 of the hemoglobin which also removes 50 of the bilirubin. The sample could then be assayed for bilirubin as described accounting for the dilation and predictable loss of bilirubin. If the sample contained more than 600 mg dL hemoglobin it was deemed unsuitable for bilirubin assay.

The sample 10 L was treated with a caffeine benzoic acid reagent 25 g L caffeine and 38 g L sodium benzoate in 85 mM sodium acetate solution in order to release bound bilirubin thus making all the bilirubin available for the diazotization reaction. Diazo reagent 75 moles sulfanilic acid and 6.6 moles sodium nitrite dissolved in 6 mL of 0.1 M HCI was added to yield the pink at acid and neutral pH azobilirubin compound. This moiety was then stabilized with a cysteine reagent 100 mg cysteine dissolved in 10.5 mL of dHO and alkalinized with alkaline tartrate reagent 100 mg cysteine dissolved in 10.5 mL of dHO to yield a blue coloration which is less prone to hemoglobin interference. The blue reaction mixture was analyzed spectrophotometrically at 600 nm and the samples were compared to a concomitantly run standard curve of Lin trol bilirubin prediluted samples Sigma St. Louis Mo. to determine total bilirubin concentration.

The reaction of bilirubin with diazotized sulfanilic acid to form azobilirubin is well known in the art and was first described in 1981. The resultant derivative of the reaction is colored pink at acidic and neutral pH and blue at alkaline pH. The assay measures the blue coloration as this is more sensitive and minimizes the interference from hemoglobin and hemoglobin derivatives. The present protocol was altered and adapted for use in a microtiter plate.

Bilrubin standard solutions available pre diluted from Sigma St. Louis Mo. as Lin trol total and direct prediluted set catalog number B1153. The standards contain the following amounts of total and direct bilirubin as assayed by Sigma.

Although this assay is extremely consistent between batches of reagents and standards a standard curve for every plate read is run. A blank containing no diazo is plated as well as blank containing no bilirubin to check for background interference from reagents.

The following Table 3 gives the amounts in L of each reagent required for the blank total and direct assays in a 96 well plate as well as the order in which the reagents should be added.

The concentration of bilirubin in the sample can be calculated from the standard curve. The total volume in each well is 165 L.

The lowest bilirubin concentration that can be reliably and reproducibly assayed using this procedure is 0.1 mg dL. The concentration absorbance relation remains linear to 40 mg dL beyond this samples should be diluted appropriately.

Through experimentation hemoglobin concentrations up to 300 mg dL do not affect the accuracy of this assay. Hemoglobin concentrations beyond this up to around 600 mg dL may be reduced to within the acceptable range by treatment with an equal volume of saturated EDTA solution followed by 2 minutes of centrifugation at 13 000 rpm to remove precipitated iron containing moieties.

This example illustrates a model of sentinel low volume SAH which may be used to measure CSF bilirubin as a means for identification of an SAH and exclusion of the diagnosis of traumatic spinal tap. The measurement of CSF bilirubin if collected 12 hours after the onset of symptoms can distinguish between a SAH and a traumatic spinal tap. Furthermore the bilirubin production occurs over a predictable time course that can be detected after a low volume SAH. It is believed that hemorrhage hemolysis and hemoglobin degradation after an SAH lead to the production of bilirubin whereas a traumatic LP contains relatively little bilirubin. The timing and processes involved in the production of bilirubin in CSF following sentinel aSAH are demonstrated.

Total bilirubin was assayed using a method based on those developed by Michaelsson and Nosslin and adapted for use in a microtiter plate by the inventors GJPG and JFC . Briefly samples was treated with a caffeine benzoic acid reagent in order to make all the bilirubin available for the diazotization reaction. A Diazo reagent was added to yield the pink azobilirubin compound and this moiety was then stabilized with a cysteine reagent and alkalinized with alkaline tartrate reagent to yield a blue coloration. This color change minimizes hemoglobin interference.

Two month old male Yorkshire pigs weighing 16 20 kg were utilized for the porcine model of an SAH. All animals were initially anesthetized with intramuscularly delivered ketamine 30 mg kg followed by intravenously administrated pentobarbital 35 mg kg through an ear vein to obtain deep surgical levels of anesthesia. After pentobarbital anesthesia induction pigs were intubated with a cuffed endotracheal tube per os and mechanically ventilated using a mechanical respirator supplemented with 1 L minute oxygen . In one animal endotracheal intubation was unsuccessful and a tracheostomy was performed. Using a cut down in the right groin the femoral artery and vein were exposed and the femoral artery was catheterized. This arterial catheter provided a recording of blood pressure and heart rate and was used for obtaining blood samples 0.5 mL for respiratory blood gas analysis acid base status and hematocrit. Blood samples withdrawn during the control period and following SAH induction were analyzed for pO pCO pH and base deficit using a Coming model 168 acid base and respiratory gas analyzer. Pentobarbital was infused continuously via a femoral vein catheter at a rate of approximately 20 mg kg hr throughout the remainder of the experiment to maintain a constant level of anesthesia. The depth of anesthesia was tested by the absence of limb withdrawal response to painful pinch as well as by monitoring increases in arterial blood pressure and heart rate. Body temperature measured using a rectal thermistor probe was maintained at 38.0 0.5 C. with a warm water blanket and portable thermal fan. In order to access the lumbar cistern a dorsal midline incision exposed the spinous processes of the lower lumbar spine and the upper sacrum. The paraspinous musculature was reflected laterally using sub periosteal dissection. Hemostasis was achieved with monopolar cautery. A 22 gauge spinal needle was inserted into the interlaminar space either L4 5 or L5 S1 to penetrate the ligamentum flavum and then the dura mater. The purpose of the surgical exposure prior to the spinal tap was to facilitate a traumatic spinal tap. Spinal fluid was then collected centrifuged and labeled as time zero. The spinal needle s stylet was reinserted and the needle was left in place for the remainder of the experiment. CSF volumes of 0.1 mL were then collected from the lumbar cistern in 1 2 hr intervals for a total of 24 hours post injection of blood or saline see below . Immediately upon collection CSF was immediately centrifuged and stored at 30 C. until analysis.

The animals cisterna magnae were accessed using a midline incision at the craniocervical junction. The muscles of the posterior neck were reflected laterally and the rectus capitus minimus was identified between the opisthion of the occiput to the upper boarder of the atlas. Mobilization of the rectus capitus minimus exposed the atlanto occipital membrane. An 18 gauge spinal needle was then inserted through the atlanto occipital membrane and the dura mater to reach the cisterna magna. A small amount of CSF egressing from the needle confirmed correct location. The initial CSF was collected centrifuged labeled as time zero and stored 30 C. . Injections of either 250 L whole arterial non heparinized blood or 250 L of 0.9 sodium chloride were administered via the spinal needle. The spinal needle s stylet was reinserted and the needle was left in place for the remainder of the experiment. Cisternal CSF samples 100 L were serially collected in 1 2 hr intervals thereafter and immediately upon collection the CSF was centrifuged and stored for assay 30 C. .

Four animals were in the experimental arm each with a 250 L volume of blood delivered to their cisterna magna. Three control animals were completed each with the injection of 250 L of isotonic 0.9 saline into their cisterna magna.

First a regression curve was fitted to the bilirubin data as a function of time. This was done separately for CM and LP data. The 95 prediction limits were obtained around the fitted curve and the upper 95 confidence limit of the control group mean was compared with the lower 95 predicted limits for the curve. An AP value of 0.05 was considered statistically different. The earliest time point where the two limits separated from each other i.e. did not overlap was declared to be the time in hours since the beginning of the experiment when the CSF bilirubin significantly exceeded control group values. This analysis was also confirmed by Standard ANOVA procedure where the control group least square LS means were compared with the SAH bilirubin LS means.

In this porcine model of aSAH sequential analysis demonstrated consistent and reproducible bilirubin elevations in lumbar cistern and cisterna magna CSF bilirubin concentrations sampled from the aSAH animals. Conversely concentrations of CSF bilirubin in the control animals did not rise significantly above baseline values. shows the time course of bilirubin production in our model. There is a significant elevation at 12 hours in both CM and LP CSF from the SAH group but not the control group. Mean concentrations of bilirubin SD obtained from the lumbar cistern 24 hours following the injection of saline or blood were 4.38 1.04 M in the SAH animals n 4 and 1.02 0.05 M in the control animals n 3 . At 24 hours post injection cisterna magna bilirubin concentrations SD were 7.29 1.33 M and 1.33 0.14 M in the SAH animals n 4 and in the control animals n 3 respectively.

The earliest time point where the control and SAH CSF bilirubin values did not overlap was determined. This analysis was analyzed by Standard ANOVA procedure where means were compared between the control group s least square and the SAH bilirubin. Lumbar puncture cisterna magna data means significantly differed at 12 hours and that 12 hour point was the first significant difference between the groups p 0.05 for LP and p 0.007 for CM .

Table 4 shows the bilirubin concentration found in the pig s serum. Also shown is the average of the zero time point control CSF Br and the bilirubin concentration found in CSF taken via a deliberately traumatic tap after the 24 hour time point in the control animals.

This experiment evidences that bilirubin production occurs in the porcine subarachnoid space after a sentinel a SAH. Additionally there was a lack of bilirubin production following sham injection. The production of bilirubin followed a reproducible time course caused by known degradation processes of blood derived heme. Following a lag period during which HO 1 is induced the substrate heme is eventually metabolized to bilirubin. If differential CSF bilirubin analysis is extended to clinical application the observed 12 hour time lag is complimentary to the ultrasensitive phase of computed tomography which is up to 12 hours. In fact the time course of bilirubin production is precisely the value of this diagnostic modality. It is also important to note that there is no significant production of bilirubin in the hemorrhagic CSF following a traumatic spinal tap model see Table 4 . Thus blood introduced during a traumatic tap will not have sufficient time for the catabolic conversion to bilirubin.

This example illustrates how the statistical analysis algorithm is employed to estimate the concentration of bilirubin in CSF. The algorithm determines the concentrations of Br and Hb in unknown CSF solution. Spectral analysis provides the absorbance curves for mock CSF for various combinations of Br and Hb respectively. The collected curves are cleaned using box car averaging technique that performs low pass filtering. This step assists in eliminating high frequency noise components from the curves. The premise of this algorithm is generating a relationship between the shape of the absorbance curve and the concentrations of Br and Hb respectively. Therefore for example if the shape of the curve and the Hb concentration is known the Br concentration may be determined using this relationship.

To accomplish this the wavelength range where both components contribute significantly to the shape of the mock CSF absorption spectrum is ascertained. The range of 450 500 nm fits this criterion. The system is modeled using multiple linear regression analysis to map the outputs Br concentration to known values of mock CSF absorption curves and Hb concentration. Therefore to determine the Br value the above model requires an estimated Hb concentration along with the absorbance data. The wavelength range of 500 600 nm is chosen where Hb dominates. The bilirubin absorbance is constrained to a low value that remains approximately constant. Linear regression analysis is used again to determine the relationship between the Hb concentration and mean absorbance in this range. For an unknown sample of CSF the latter range is used to estimate the Hb concentration. The combination of this predicted value and the unknown absorbance data serves as an input to the multiple regression model that outputs the Br concentration.

The approximated linear regression for Hb across the 500 600 nm wavelength range is shown in . Rather than fitting the regression models to one particular line two lines max and min are evaluated. The confidence R is high 0.97 0.98 showing the high degree of correlation. The R value was for design and was always 0.95 or above to obtain better accuracy and less error in the overall algorithm.

The prediction of hemoglobin is achieved when a mock CSF solution is run on the Hb model. The regression model shown in is used for determining the estimated value of Hb. As shows the estimated value of Hb shows good fit to the actual values. Currently the model is being improved to accommodate more samples and improve the regression model for Hb. Our primary objective in this paper is to determine the predicted bilirubin values. As shown in the predicted and the actual Gold Standard obtained by assay are plotted for noise free data. It is observed that the values at varying concentrations predict efficiently. In terms of statistics the variance of the prediction is shown in . This defines how spread out the predicted value is from the actual value within 95 of the mean distribution value .

