---

title: Redictation of misrecognized words using a list of alternatives
abstract: Upon selection of a displayed word, a list of alternatives for the selected word is displayed. Each alternative in the list has an associated symbol. A speech signal is then decoded to identify a list of possible words and the list of possible words is displayed with each possible word having an associated symbol.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08473295&OS=08473295&RS=08473295
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 08473295
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051021
---
This application claims priority benefit of U.S. Provisional application 60 705 835 filed on Aug. 5 2005 and entitled REDICTATION OF MISRECOGNIZED WORDS USING A LIST OF ALTERNATIVES.

Speech recognition is the conversion of speech signals into words. During speech recognition the speech signals are compared to one or more models to identify the words that may have been spoken.

In general speech recognition is a probabilistic technique that attempts to identify a sequence of phonetic units that provides the highest probability for the speech signal. Many recognition systems not only identify the most likely sequence of words but also identify less likely yet possible alternative sequences of words that may be represented by the speech signal.

Even the best speech recognition systems occasionally recognize the wrong word. Currently applications that rely on speech recognition provide ways in which users can correct these errors. For example one simple technique has the user select the word that is in error using an input device and then type in the correct word.

Another error correction technique has the user select the word using a speech command. The application then provides a list of alternative words that were returned by the speech recognition engine as being likely alternatives to the most likely word that was recognized. In one such system each alternative word is associated with a number such that the user can select the word by speaking the number.

In order for such a correction scheme to work the word that the user wanted must appear in the list of alternatives. If the recognition system does not produce the wanted word as an alternative this correction scheme could not be used to make the correction.

Another way for a user to correct words is to select the word that is in error and then simply redictate the word they wanted. This correction process works well if the speech recognition system is able to recognize the word when it is pronounced again. However many times the speech recognition engine will misidentify the word again and replace the selected word with another word that is wrong. This will require further redictation by the user and can frustrate users.

The discussion above is merely provided for general background information and is not intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

Upon selection of a displayed word a list of alternatives for the selected word is displayed. Each alternative in the list has an associated symbol. A speech signal is then decoded to identify a list of possible words and the list of possible words is displayed with each possible word having an associated symbol.

This Summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the Detailed Description. This Summary is not intended to identify key features or essential features of the claimed subject matter nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter

Embodiments are operational with numerous other general purpose or special purpose computing system environments or configurations. Examples of well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with various embodiments include but are not limited to personal computers server computers hand held or laptop devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based systems set top boxes programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers telephony systems distributed computing environments that include any of the above systems or devices and the like.

Embodiments may be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by a computer. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Some embodiments are designed to be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network. In a distributed computing environment program modules are located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing some embodiments includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus.

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CD ROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies.

A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard a microphone and a pointing device such as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . In addition to the monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer is operated in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a hand held device a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on remote computer . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

Memory is implemented as non volatile electronic memory such as random access memory RAM with a battery back up module not shown such that information stored in memory is not lost when the general power to mobile device is shut down. A portion of memory is preferably allocated as addressable memory for program execution while another portion of memory is preferably used for storage such as to simulate storage on a disk drive.

Memory includes an operating system application programs as well as an object store . During operation operating system is preferably executed by processor from memory . Operating system in one preferred embodiment is a WINDOWS CE brand operating system commercially available from Microsoft Corporation. Operating system is preferably designed for mobile devices and implements database features that can be utilized by applications through a set of exposed application programming interfaces and methods. The objects in object store are maintained by applications and operating system at least partially in response to calls to the exposed application programming interfaces and methods.

Communication interface represents numerous devices and technologies that allow mobile device to send and receive information. The devices include wired and wireless modems satellite receivers and broadcast tuners to name a few. Mobile device can also be directly connected to a computer to exchange data therewith. In such cases communication interface can be an infrared transceiver or a serial or parallel communication connection all of which are capable of transmitting streaming information.

Input output components include a variety of input devices such as a touch sensitive screen buttons rollers and a microphone as well as a variety of output devices including an audio generator a vibrating device and a display. The devices listed above are by way of example and need not all be present on mobile device . In addition other input output devices may be attached to or found with mobile device .

The present invention provides new techniques for invoking and selecting lists of alternatives. provides a flow diagram of one embodiment for invoking and using lists of alternatives for correcting speech recognition errors. provides a block diagram of elements used in the method of .

In step of a speech signal of is provided to a speech recognition engine which produces recognized words and alternatives . Under one embodiment each word recognized by speech recognition engine is provided with one or more alternatives that are less likely than the recognized word but still plausible given the speech recognition models.

Recognized words and alternatives are provided to a mode evaluation method which determines whether the spoken utterance represents dictation or a command. If mode evaluation method determines that the recognized words represent dictation mode evaluation method calls text display method which generates displayable recognized text which is displayed on display .

At step the user issues a command to correct a word or phrase in the displayed dictation. Under one embodiment this command is a vocal command such as correct ore which is decoded by speech recognition engine to produce recognized words and alternatives . The recognized words and alternatives are evaluated by mode evaluation method to determine if they contain a command. Since the recognized words contain a command to correct text mode evaluation method calls correction method which highlights the selected word or phrase at step as shown by highlighting box of .

In some embodiments at step correction method extends the list of alternatives that were returned with the selected word or phrase in the original dictation. Specifically starting with the most likely word in the list of alternatives correction method adds alternative representations of the word such as capitalizing the first letter of the word converting textual versions of words into symbols such as converting one to 1 and adding abbreviations for words such as st. for street .

At step correction method displays the top n alternative words from the extended list in a correction dialog box . The dialog box is then displayed on display .

In list each alternative word has been associated with a symbol specifically a number. In the dialog box the user is instructed to say the number that is next to the item that they want. Thus if the extended list of alternatives includes the alternative that the user wants the user may simply speak the number to select the word. Dialog box also instructs the user to say the word again if they do not see the word in list .

At step the user either says a number for an item in the list or re pronounces the word. Speech recognition engine decodes the user s speech to produce a new set of recognized words and alternatives which is provided to text evaluation method . At step text evaluation method determines if the decoded words refer to a number. If the decoded word is a number the selected word such as word is replaced by the word or phrase associated with the number in the list of alternatives. The cursor is then moved back to the place at which it was located when the correction command was issued.

If the decoded speech signal does not refer to a number at step the lists of alternatives provided with the newly decoded word or phrase in step is extended at step by adding alternative representations of the words in the list. The process then returns to step to display the top n alternative words of the new extended list in a correction dialog box.

An example of such a dialog box is shown in as dialog box . In dialog box list is shown to contain a different collection of word alternatives. The list of alternatives has changed because the user s pronunciation of the word during redictation was slightly different than it was during the original dictation.

As shown in the user is once again given the opportunity to either state a number or repronounce the word. If the user repronounces the word the word is decoded and a new set of alternatives are identified at step based on that new pronunciation. At step text evaluation method determines if the user has stated a number. If the user once again does not state a number the new alternatives list is extended at step and the process returns to step .

Upon returning to step a new dialog box which is dialog box of is shown with a new alternative list . Steps and are repeated until the user selects a number or otherwise exits the dialog box. If the user selected a number at step such as number in the text associated with the number would replace the selected text at step producing the display of in which the word awe has been put in place of the word ore. The cursor is then moved to the point where it was before the correction command was issued.

As described above the method of allows the user to continue to obtain a list of alternatives until they find a list that contains the word they want. This improves the chances that the user will be able to indicate which word they actually want to appear in the dictation since the user is always given multiple items to select from with each pronunciation.

Although the method of was shown with an example involving a single word those skilled in the art will recognize that an entire phrase could be used in place of one word. In such a case the user would select more than one word and the alternative list would contain a list of alternative phrases. With each pronunciation of the phrase a new list of alternative phrases would be produced until the phrase the user wanted appeared.

At step the new word or phrase is compared to the selected word or phrase to determine if they match. For a single word the new word must match exactly. Under one embodiment phrases will match if the first word and the last word of the phrases are the same regardless of whether the other words of the phrase match. If the new word or phrase does not match the selected word or phrase at step the selected word or phrase is replaced with the new word or phrase at step . If the new word or phrase does match the selected word or phrase at step the list of alternatives returned with the new word or phrase in decoding step is extended at step by finding alternative representations for words in the alternatives list as discussed above. Note that for phrases the list of alternatives may not be extended so that more the phrases identified by the speech recognition engine may be provided to the user.

At step the top n alternative words or phrases of the extended list of alternatives is shown in a correction box such as correction box of . The process of then enters a loop as shown in by continuing at box of .

In the embodiment of a list of alternatives is provided to the user upon detecting that the speech recognition engine has made the same mistake at step . This helps the user to obtain a list of alternatives when the speech recognition engine continues to make the same mistake in recognizing the speech without requiring the user to take any action other than repronouncing the word to cause the list of alternatives to appear.

Although the subject matter has been described in language specific to structural features and or methodological acts it is to be understood that the subject matter defined in the appended claims is not necessarily limited to the specific features or acts described above. Rather the specific features and acts described above are disclosed as example forms of implementing the claims.

