---

title: Bucket wheel assembly for fluid flow meters
abstract: An improved bucket wheel assembly with a center frame, having a plurality of fingers extending therefrom. In each of the fingers a slot is formed. The assembly also includes a plurality of conically shaped hollow cups. The hollow cups each have a wall that forms an apex and a circular opening. The hollow cups may also have a second slot formed by two substantially parallel protuberances on the inner surface of each hollow cup. The hollow cups are attached to the center frame by matching the slots and sliding one into the other, so that a portion of the finger is between the protuberances, from the opening of each hollow cup. The hollow cup is slid into the slot until it reaches the bottom of the slot on the finger.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07017425&OS=07017425&RS=07017425
owner: 
number: 07017425
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20050404
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

This invention relates in general to fluid flow meters more particularly to Price Type AA fluid flow meters and most particularly to the bucket wheel assembly used in Price Type AA fluid flow meters.

Measurements of water flow are of interest to those in the fields of managing water resources designing water control structures or investigating hydrologic systems. Many devices have been designed to measure flow in open channel systems. For many years the U.S. Geological Survey has employed Price Type AA fluid flow meters in the field for this purpose.

In operation the Price Type AA fluid flow meter employs a bucket wheel assembly that is mounted upon a shaft and rotates in response to fluid flow generating a signal that is proportional to the fluid flow velocity. The current bucket wheel assembly is made of plated brass. It employs six hollow conical cups that are hand formed from sheet metal and individually soldered to a brass star shaped frame. The finished unit is then plated. The frame is shaped so that a strut connects the apex of each cup to the outer diameter of the following cup around the frame.

There are several problems associated with the metal wheel bucket assembly associated with the current Price Type AA fluid flow meter. First due to the building process described above it is difficult to maintain precise dimensional control of the parts of the assembly. In order to obtain an accurate fluid flow reading using the Price Type AA fluid flow meter the cups of the bucket wheel must be as close to identical in dimensions and position as possible. Second the struts used to attach the cups to the center frame provide a poor response to vertically angled water flow. Third the cost of the metal assembly due to parts and hand fabrication is relatively high.

In order to address some of these problems a plastic version of the bucket wheel assembly was developed and disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4 866 985. This bucket wheel assembly was made from polycarbonate or polyethylene plastics. It comprised six non hollow conical cups and a center disc that were injection molded as one piece. While this design addressed the cost issue noted above the design performed poorly in comparison to the metal bucket wheel assembly. This design was found to under register velocity in field conditions because of its poor cosine response to vertically angled water flows. The poor cosine response was due to the solid cups. Due to these limitations this metal bucket assembly is still used under most conditions today.

Therefore it is desired to provide a bucket wheel assembly for use in a Price Type AA fluid flow meter that is relatively low in cost and provides at least the performance of the metal bucket wheel assembly used currently.

The invention proposed herein comprises an improved bucket wheel assembly for a fluid flow meter. The parts of the assembly may be injection molded and easily assembled and the assembly provides superior performance compared to currently used metal or plastic bucket wheel assemblies.

Accordingly it is an object of this invention to provide a bucket wheel assembly for a fluid flow meter that is relatively low cost compared to currently used bucket wheel assemblies.

It is a further object of this invention to provide a bucket wheel assembly that provides more precise performance compared to currently used bucket wheel assemblies.

This invention meets these and other objectives related to bucket wheels for fluid meters by providing a bucket wheel assembly that is formed of a high strength plastic material. Due to this type of construction the elements of the assembly may be manufactured by injection molding techniques. In general the assembly comprises a center frame having a plurality of fingers extending therefrom. In each of the fingers a slot is formed. The assembly also includes a plurality of conically shaped hollow cups. The hollow cups each have a wall that forms an apex and a circular opening. The hollow cups may also have a second slot formed by two substantially parallel protuberances on the inner surface of each hollow cup. The hollow cups are attached to the center frame by matching the slots and sliding one into the other so that a portion of the finger is between the protuberances from the opening of each hollow cup. The hollow cup is slid into the slot until it reaches the bottom of the slot on the finger.

The invention as embodied herein comprises an improved bucket wheel assembly for a fluid flow meter used in open channel water systems. The invention provides a significant cost reduction to the metal bucket wheel assemblies currently employed in such devices as well as increasing the performance of the system due to improvement in dimensional controls of the parts of the assembly decreased weight of the assembly and improved design of the assembly.

A bucket wheel assembly is installed in a Price Type AA fluid flow meter to translate the linear motion of water flow around the meter into a rotational velocity. The rate at which the wheel rotates for a given constant water flow velocity is determined by tow tank testing and linear regression analysis of test data. This results in a rating equation typically of the form V a bR where V is the water flow velocity R is the wheel revolutions per second and a and b are constants determined by linear regression of the test data. The velocity of the water flow can be determined by counting and timing the rotations of the wheel about the meter axis and using the wheel revolutions per second in a rating equation derived for the specific bucket wheel characteristics. Thus it is extremely important to obtain an accurate flow that all of the elements of the bucket wheel assembly be dimensionally consistent.

As described above most current bucket wheel assemblies employed in fluid flow meters are assemblies constructed of metal and some of the elements of the assemblies must be made by hand. Due to these limitations dimensional control of the parts of the assemblies is extremely difficult. Therefore performance of these bucket wheels are suspect because of potential variation in the size of the cups.

The present invention elements are constructed of a high strength plastic material such as ABS plastic which provides several advantages over the metal bucket wheel assemblies. These parts can be manufactured by injection molding techniques which greatly increases dimensional control of the parts. This manufacturing process also should decrease the cost of the assembly by five to ten times. Also the use of plastic material should decrease the weight of assembly by about 66 from about 5.4 ounces to about 1.8 ounces . This will make the assembly and fluid flow meter much more responsive at lower water velocities. Still further the elasticity of the plastic material maintains dimensional integrity when the wheel strikes objects such as floating debris or bridge structures versus potential metal bending under such conditions.

Referring to the invention comprises a bucket wheel assembly for a fluid flow meter. A center frame formed of a plastic material has a plurality of fingers extending from it. In a preferred embodiment six fingers extend from the center frame . Each finger has a slot formed therein. The slot length depends upon the size of the assembly and may be selected by one skilled in the art.

A plurality of conically shaped hollow cups equal in number to the fingers are also employed in the present invention. The hollow cups are made of the same material as the center frame preferably ABS plastic. Each hollow cup comprises a wall that forms an apex and a circular shaped opening . In a preferred embodiment a pair of protuberances are formed on the inside of the wall of each cup . The protuberances form a second slot . Finally it is also preferred that the wall be beveled as it approaches the opening . While the amount of beveling may be selected by one skilled in the art an example would be the wall going from a width of about 0.75 hundredths of an inch to about 0.3 hundredths of an inch. This beveling improves the response of the bucket wheel assembly in low velocity water flow.

The device is assembled in the following manner. The second slot is matched with the slot and the cup is slid into slot from the opening . The cup is slid until it reaches the bottom of the slot . A portion of the finger is now between the protuberances . All of the cups are placed upon the fingers in this manner. Preferably an adhesive or chemical welding material is placed on slot and or between protuberances in slot prior to sliding cup into slot from opening . Optionally other methods of providing a structural bonding between the fingers and the cups may be employed. For example holes may be drilled through the fingers and cups and pins may be inserted therein.

What is described are specific examples of many possible variations on the same invention and are not intended in a limiting sense. The claimed invention can be practiced using other variations not specifically described above.

