---

title: Method for determining missile information from radar returns
abstract: A target missile identifier compares radar cross-section (RCS) information about the missile with a set including at least one template of RCS to make determination(s) of at least one of (a) the missile type (solid/liquid propellant), (b) missile main engine cutoff, andor (c) staging state of a multistage missile.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07295149&OS=07295149&RS=07295149
owner: Lockheed Martin Corporation
number: 07295149
owner_city: Bethesda
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051019
---
This invention was made with government support under Contract Grant AEGIS N00024 03 C 6110. The United States Government has a non exclusive non transferable paid up license in this invention.

This invention relates to the identification of missile type stage of operation or both from a comparison of radar return information with templates of radar cross section of one or more missile types.

Antimissile efforts may use directed beam weapons in which the future missile or target location is not of particular interest as the speed of the beam is so great that the missile motion is irrelevant. In those cases in which antimissile interceptors are used the interceptor speed is of the same order as that of the target missile and the estimated future location of the target missile is of great importance. A great deal of effort has been put into antimissile interceptor guidance schemes which predict the future location of the target missile the interceptor missile or both so as to attempt to cause the interceptor to get within a given range of the target missile. These guidance systems require measurements of the target missile so as to determine its current location and also require estimates of the type of missile the stage of operation if it is multistage and its projected trajectory.

It is known that rocket engine or rocket motor plumes are hot and radiate energy across the entire electromagnetic spectrum. The radiated energy constitutes a signature allowing the rocket engine to be identified or characterized. Different missile systems using either liquid or solid propellant display different infrared IR signatures at various altitudes mach numbers and aspect angles. These IR signatures have been used for many years to warn of Intercontinental Ballistic Missile ICBM launches or to characterize tactical threat systems.

Radar systems have been used for tracking hostile missiles. In general the radar returns were processed to determine the current location of the hostile missile and to provide the location information to processors such as Kalman processors which attempted to predict the future location of the hostile missile.

A method according to an aspect of the invention is for determining target missile engine characteristics such as engine solid liquid propellant and possibly missile type main engine cutoff MECO andor the staging state of a multistage missile. The method comprises the step of preparing a plurality of templates expressing characteristics of the radar cross section RCS of missile engine plumes at various stages of burn of at least one type of missile for which engine cutoff determination is to be made. The missile and its plume if any is observed using a radar system to generate return information including information relating to the hard body of the missile and of its plume. Aspects of the return information are compared with the templates for determining at least one of a time of engine cutoff b time of a staging event and c typing of the missile engine. In a particular mode of this method the step of comparing aspects includes the further step of processing the information relating to the hard body of the missile and of its plume to reduce the level of the hard body information relative to the plume information to thereby tend to isolate the plume information. In an other mode of the method the step of preparing a plurality of templates expressing characteristics of the radar cross section of missile engine plumes at various stages of burn includes the step of preparing a plurality of templates expressing at least the effects on radar cross section of a altitude b missile hard body mach number and c aspect angle. This other mode also includes the step of extracting missile altitude mach number and aspect angle from the return information and the step of comparing aspects of the return information with the templates includes the further step of comparing the plume radar cross section of the return information with the plume radar cross section information in at least a plurality of the templates for the known current values of altitude mach number and aspect angle to select that one of the templates with the most likely match of the radar cross sections.

The radar system of performs the usual processing of the return signal to produce signals representing the radar cross section of the entire target and also representing the instantaneous position of the missile both in range azimuth and elevation. The range azimuth and elevation information is coupled by way of a path illustrated as to an interceptor guidance arrangement illustrated as a block . Guidance arrangement uses the range and location information to determine the velocity and acceleration of the target missile and controls the flight of an interceptor missile to an impact with the missile target or if the interceptor missile carries an explosive warhead to within kill distance of the target missile.

It is well known in the art that the control of an interceptor missile is fraught with difficulties. The basic problem is that the interceptor missile must intercept the target missile at a future time but must be directed toward an interception point which can only be estimated. It is bad enough that the engine of the interceptor missile may burn hot nominal or cold thereby affecting the acceleration but the burn may change from time to time during the intercept introducing variables into the estimation of the future position of the interceptor. At least the interceptor is under the control of the defender against the target missile and its characteristics are known to the controller and may be monitored. The target missile is not however known so its fundamental characteristics are not initially known. The missile type and its future locations must be estimated as well as possible. In the case of a target missile which is in a ballistic trajectory a trajectory controlled by the force of gravity implying no acceleration due to an engine the acceleration is due only to gravity and such incidentals as aerodynamic drag if applicable. In the case of a boosting target missile the problems are compounded. Initially not knowing the type of missile means that the nominal thrust and the nominal change of mass as a function of time are unknown and therefore the acceleration cannot be determined and the number of engine stages is also not known. These problems may lead to delay in acquiring sufficient information to properly estimate the future locations of the target missile. It will be clear that the chances of successfully intercepting a target missile are improved with early determination of its future locations.

According to an aspect of the invention an arrangement designated generally as in uses information relating to the radar cross section of the target missile to aid in determining or estimating the type of target missile solid or liquid propellant for example the state ON or OFF of its engine and when staging events transitions between engine operation and non operation occurred will occur.

Arrangement of includes a boost ballistic determination processor illustrated as a block and block interacts with a database preloaded with plume emitter radar cross section RCS information illustrated as a block .

Block of represents a decision block which makes the determination of a match or no match between the currently received RCS information and the template currently being evaluated. If there is no match decision block routes the logic by its NO output and by way of a path back to block where the currently received RCS information is compared with another template. If there is a match decision block routes the logic by its YES output and by way of a path back to block where the currently received RCS information is compared with another template. This continues for all templates. Eventually one or more matches are expected to be found in which case the logic leaves decision block by the YES path and proceeds to a completion block in which the particular templates which matched the currently received RCS information are noted. Once the matching templates are identified it is a simple matter to determine whether the templates are based on a liquid or solid propellant missile type. The missile type solid or liquid propellant and possibly the actual missile type can then be reported to the interceptor guidance block of . It should be understood that the target missile RCS information is generated on a continuing basis as the radar system of illuminates the target missile so the logic of can be re run or cycle as often as desired with updated RCS information. Thus even if a single radar illumination is insufficient to provide enough information to determine missile type the information of subsequent illuminations may be sufficient.

In the logic of processed missile hardbody plume radar cross section RCS is available after completion of processing in block . At this stage of the logic the logic may branch to the logic illustrated in so the logic flows of may operate concurrently. The logic branching from block arrives at block of and proceeds by way of a logic path to a block which represents engine cut off analysis using plume characteristics from a source illustrated as a block and time frequency analysis from a source illustrated as a block . Each plume RCS template as described in conjunction with block represents one missile and comprises one or more three dimensional curves each for a specific radar frequency and trajectory with axes of Altitude Mach number and Aspect Angle defining points along the curve. Points on all of these curves correspond to a particular template entry for missile range RCS values missile Doppler RCS values and a value for the total incoherent RCS. Time frequency analysis uses variations in RCS range spread characteristics of the hardbody and plume and their gradients as an indication of the ON or OFF state of the engine. The results of the engine cut off analysis in block are applied to a decision block which routes the logic based on whether the analysis shows that the main engine has cut off. If the main engine has not cut off the logic leaves decision block by the NO output and flows by a logic path back to block for another recursion through the logic. If the engine cut off analysis in block is to the effect that cut off has occurred the logic leaves decision block by the YES output and flows to a main engine cut off MECO declaration block . This declaration is used by the interceptor guidance block of to aid in estimating future locations of the target missile.

The logic arriving at block of also flows by way of a second logic path to a multistage system analysis block which uses plume characteristic templates from block and time frequency analysis from block to determine whether the target missile is single or multistage. In general one would expect an overall reduction of RCS coming only from the hardbody as the previous stage drops away. As the next stage engine starts the level of the RCS would again increase. This process could continue for any number of stages. From analysis block the logic of flows by way of a logic path to a decision block which routes the logic in dependence upon the decision of analysis block . If the decision is that the target missile is a single stage missile the logic loops back by way of a logic path to block to begin another iteration. Eventually a determination may be made that the target missile is of the multistage type in which case decision block routes the logic to a staging declaration block . Staging declaration block will switch from declaring a single stage missile to declaring a multi stage missile when the logic arrives from decision block . The staging information is used by interceptor guidance block of to aid in directing the interceptor missile toward an estimated future position of the target missile.

A method according to an aspect of the invention is for determining target missile engine characteristics such as solid liquid propellant and possibly missile type main engine cut off MECO and staging state in a multistage missile. The method comprises the step of preparing a plurality of templates expressing characteristics of the radar cross section of missile engine plumes at various stages of burn of at least one type of missile for which engine characteristics or determination is or are to be made. The missile and its plume if any is observed using a radar system to generate return information including information relating to the hard body of the missile and of its plume . Aspects of the return information are compared with the templates for determining at least one of a time of engine cutoff b time of a staging event and c typing of the missile engine. In a particular mode of this method the step of comparing aspects includes the further step of processing the information relating to the hard body of the missile and of its plume to reduce the level of the hard body information relative to the plume information to thereby tend to isolate the plume information. In an other mode of the method the step of preparing a plurality of templates expressing characteristics of the radar cross section of missile engine plumes at various stages of burn includes the step of preparing a plurality of templates expressing at least the effects on radar cross section of a altitude b missile hard body mach number and c aspect angle. This other mode also includes the step of extracting missile altitude mach number and aspect angle from the return information and the step of comparing aspects of the return information with the templates includes the further step of comparing the plume radar cross section of the return information with the plume radar cross section information in at least a plurality of the templates for the known current values of altitude mach number and aspect angle to select that one of the templates with the most likely match of the radar cross sections.

