---

title: Method and apparatus for carrier customization in communication systems
abstract: A method of customizing a wireless device to a predetermined configuration is described. A wireless device configured with at least one carrier-specific parameter for a first carrier is modified to access at least one carrier-specific parameter for a second carrier during operation of the wireless device and responsive to a predetermined network switch input received by the wireless device. A carrier customization module system for a wireless device includes a carrier customization module loader executed by the wireless device which is configured with at least one carrier-specific parameter for a first carrier. The loader selects at least one carrier-specific parameter for a second carrier from among one or more carrier-specific parameters during operation of the wireless device and responsive to a predetermined network switch input received by the wireless device. The loader modifies the wireless device to access the second carrier using the selected carrier-specific parameter for the second carrier.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07636333&OS=07636333&RS=07636333
owner: QUALCOMM Incorporated
number: 07636333
owner_city: San Diego
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051114
---
The present Application for Patent claims priority to Provisional Application No. 60 628 768 entitled CARRIER CUSTOMIZATION MODULE CCM IN CDMA HANDSET SOFTWARE filed Nov. 16 2004 and assigned to the assignee hereof and hereby expressly incorporated by reference herein.

The disclosed embodiments relate to wireless communications and more particularly to a method and apparatus for carrier customization of a wireless device in a communication system.

Different companies manufacture different wireless devices e.g. cellular telephones personal digital assistants etc. for use on one or more telecommunication carrier s communication networks. Many times particular carriers apply different requirements which devices must meet in order to be able to operate on the carrier s network. Device manufacturers and vendors modify the devices to meet carrier specific requirements.

End users of such wireless devices may desire need to use the same device in conjunction with different carriers e.g. better different service coverage area pricing features etc. After a manufacturer configures a wireless device for a particular carrier the device user is required to take send the device to a second carrier to which the user is switching the device for operation. Typically the second carrier replaces the controlling software of the device with software configured to the second carrier requirements for operating on the carrier s network. This process is time consuming and inconvenient for the end user and requires additional resources of the second carrier.

A method embodiment of customizing a wireless device to a predetermined configuration includes modifying a wireless device configured with at least one carrier specific parameter for a first carrier to access at least one carrier specific parameter for a second carrier during operation of the wireless device and responsive to a predetermined network switch input received by the wireless device.

A carrier customization module system embodiment for a wireless device includes a carrier customization module loader executed by the wireless device which is configured with at least one carrier specific parameter for a first carrier. The loader selects at least one carrier specific parameter for a second carrier from among one or more carrier specific parameters during operation of the wireless device and responsive to a predetermined network switch input received by the wireless device. The loader modifies the wireless device to access the second carrier using the selected carrier specific parameter for the second carrier.

A wireless device for connection with a communication carrier embodiment includes a computer platform and a carrier customization module. The computer platform is arranged to communicate with a first carrier based on a carrier specific profile including carrier specific parameters. The carrier customization module loader is resident on the computer platform and arranged to a select at least one carrier specific parameter from among one or more carrier specific parameters during operation of the wireless device and b configure the computer platform to access a second carrier using the selected carrier specific parameter on the computer platform.

Another method embodiment of providing a carrier specific parameter for a first carrier to a wireless device configured with at least one carrier specific parameter for a second carrier includes transmitting at least one carrier specific parameter for a first carrier from a server to a wireless device responsive to receipt of a request for the at least one carrier specific parameter from the wireless device.

A carrier server embodiment for providing a carrier specific parameter for the first carrier to a wireless device configured with at least one carrier specific parameter for a second carrier includes a data storage component resident on a computer platform. The data storage component is arranged to be executed by the computer platform and storing at least one carrier specific parameter for the first carrier. The computer platform is arranged to a communicate with the wireless device using an established connection between the wireless device and the second carrier and 2 transmit at least one carrier specific parameter for the first carrier from a server to the wireless device responsive to receipt of a request for the at least one carrier specific parameter from the wireless device.

Still other advantages of the embodiments will become readily apparent to those skilled in the art from the following detailed description wherein the preferred embodiments are shown and described simply by way of illustration of the best mode contemplated of carrying out the invention. As will be realized the invention is capable of other and different embodiments and its several details are capable of modifications in various obvious respects all without departing from the embodiments.

In an embodiment a server connected to the second carrier network stores a carrier specific profile specifying carrier specific parameters specific to the second carrier for access by device . Server stores carrier specific profile in a storage medium not shown e.g. hard disk memory floppy disk or other storage mechanism. Device contacts server of the second carrier and downloads the second carrier s carrier specific profile for use by the device. Server is accessible to device via wireless network by way of a network connection between the first carrier s wireless network and the second carrier s server. After device downloads the second carrier s profile and is configured based on the carrier specific parameters the device is able to communicate with the second carrier s wireless network .

Returning to in another embodiment the second carrier s carrier specific profile is transferred to device using a wired e.g. cable connection or wireless e.g. infra red protocol Bluetooth wireless protocol WiFi protocol etc. connection to a processing device such as a computer system e.g. server .

In another embodiment device includes the second carrier s carrier specific profile depicted in dotted outline in CCM of the device in addition to the first carrier s carrier specific profile at the outset i.e. as delivered by a manufacturer or vendor and the device need not download the second carrier s profile in order to access the second network . Rather according to the embodiment device need only be configured based on the second carrier s carrier specific parameters located in CCM for the device to be able to communicate with the second carrier s wireless network .

Device includes a CCM loader a sequence of executable instructions stored in memory of device for execution by the device for receiving storing and managing carrier specific profiles in CCM on the device. In another embodiment CCM loader is stored as a component of ASIC or in local database . The operation of CCM loader is now described in further detail with reference to .

In an embodiment the network switch request specifies a particular carrier network with which device is requested to communicate. In another embodiment the network switch request specifies a particular parameter against which possible networks are to be compared prior to establishing communication with the device. For example the user may desire to switch to a network providing one or more particular features which the user desires to make use of and which are unavailable or too expensive from the first carrier.

After receiving a network switch request CCM loader execution proceeds to step wherein the CCM loader queries the CCM to determine if a profile specific to the requested carrier exists in the CCM. In another embodiment CCM loader queries local database for the existence of a profile in addition to CCM . If an appropriate carrier specific profile exists in CCM CCM loader proceeds to step and configures device to make use of the second carrier s carrier specific parameters as specified in the second carrier s carrier specific profile .

If an appropriate carrier specific profile does not exist in CCM CCM loader proceeds to step and transmits a query via network to server of the second carrier. If an appropriate carrier specific profile does not exist or is not available via network the flow of control proceeds to step and prompts the user to provide the second carrier s carrier specific parameters e.g. in the form of a second carrier carrier specific profile . In an embodiment the user manipulates device to cause entry of the second carrier s carrier specific parameters. In another embodiment the user provides the second carrier s carrier specific parameters by connecting a storage medium not shown or a computer system not shown to device and transferring the profile to device . If the user fails to provide a profile to device then at step the device continues to execute instructions using the existing first carrier s carrier specific profile .

If an appropriate carrier specific profile exists in server CCM loader proceeds to step downloads the profile from the server and configures device to make use of the second carrier s carrier specific parameters as specified in the second carrier s carrier specific profile .

After device is configured the flow of control proceeds to step and the device connects to the second carrier s network . In another embodiment step may be delayed until device attempts to access network e.g. the first attempt by the user to make a call or access other functionality of the network.

In a further embodiment carrier specific profile and or carrier specific parameters are encrypted and or digitally signed to prevent unauthorized alteration and or theft. In a still further embodiment server performs authentication of device and or the user of the device prior to transmitting the requested carrier specific parameter or profile to the device.

Display parameters relate to display aspects of device such as character encoding carrier specific logo graphics language support call timers etc. Carrier network determination parameters relate to how device determines to which carrier network to connect. In another embodiment carrier network determination parameters relate to the network switch request determination described above with respect to . Dialing feature parameters relate to user command entry mechanisms such as plus code dialing international dialing and other dialing related aspects. User interface parameters relate to carrier specified user interface elements and functionality such as interface display styles and layouts. In an embodiment user interface parameters determine which and in which order functionality is displayed to the user.

Carrier specific features relate to service features including voice parameters messaging parameters data parameters and other carrier related parameters. Voice parameters include feature codes notification differences in carrier networks and other parameters related to voice communication. Messaging parameters include text encoding maximum message lengths and other carrier specific messaging specifications. Data parameters include dormancy and other parameters related to data communication of device with a carrier s network.

With specific reference to CCM includes a pair of carrier specific profiles A B. With respect to profile A A represents the first carrier s carrier specific profile and profile B B represents the second carrier s carrier specific profile. Each profile A B includes a set of respective parameters A B specifying various features and specifications for device operating in connection with the carrier specific network to which the carrier specific profile A B relates.

More particularly carrier specific profile A includes parameter A entries specifying carrier specific Parameter A Parameter C Parameter E and Parameter F and carrier specific profile B includes parameter B entries specifying carrier specific Parameter B Parameter C and Parameter D. Each of the parameters A B specify a particular setting or value for device . As depicted profiles A B do not include the same parameters . In different embodiments different profiles may include the same different and overlapping parameters.

Memory includes a current profile including parameters Parameter A Parameter C Parameter D Parameter E and Parameter F. During execution device accesses parameters of current profile in order to operate on a given network. As device is connected with the first carrier s network CCM loader stores carrier specific profile A parameters A into current profile for access by device . As depicted in current profile includes Parameter D as a parameter in addition to Parameter A C E and F from profile A A e.g. Parameter D may have been previously manually entered by the user may remain from an earlier time at which device connected with the second carrier etc. In an embodiment CCM loader copies the values from the carrier specific profiles A B to the current profile . In another embodiment CCM loader establishes a link or reference from relevant current profile parameters to the corresponding specified carrier specific profile parameters A B.

The devices described herein may utilize application programming interfaces APIs sometimes referred to as runtime environments and software platforms that are installed onto their local computer platform and which are used for example to simplify operations of such devices such as by providing generalized calls for device specific resources. Further some such APIs provide software developers the ability to create software applications that are fully executable on such devices. In addition some of such APIs may be operationally located between the computing device system software and the software applications such that the computing device computing functionality is made available to the software applications without requiring the software developer to have the specific computing device system source code. Further some APIs may provide mechanisms for secure communications between such personal devices i.e. clients and remote devices i.e. servers using secure cryptographic information.

Examples of such APIs some of which are discussed in more detail below include versions of the Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW developed by Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego Calif. BREW is sometimes described as a thin veneer existing over a computing device s typically a wireless cellular phone operating system which among other features provides interfaces to hardware features particularly found on personal computing devices. BREW is further includes at least the one advantage of being able to be provided on such personal computing devices at a relatively low cost with respect to demands on such device resources and with respect to the price paid by consumers for devices containing the BREW API. Other features associated with BREW include its end to end software distribution platform that provides a variety of benefits for wireless service operators software developers and computing device consumers. At least one such currently available end to end software distribution platform includes logic distributed over a server client architecture where the server performs for example billing security and application distribution functionality and the client performs for example application execution security and user interface functionality.

One or more of the described embodiments are used in conjunction with a runtime environment API executing on the computing device. One such runtime environment API is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREW software previously discussed. However one or more of the described embodiments can be used with other types of runtime environments APIs that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless client computing devices.

The application download server is shown here on a network with other computer elements in communication with the wireless network . There can be a stand alone server and each server can provide separate services and processes to the client devices across the wireless network . System may also include at least one stored application database that holds the software applications e.g. a CCM loader that are downloadable by the wireless devices the CCM loader application is indicated as being downloadable to the wireless devices by a dashed line . However those skilled in the art will appreciate that the configuration illustrated in is merely exemplary. Accordingly other embodiments can include one of more servers that can each perform all the described functions and contain all necessary hardware and software or can contain only selected functionality.

In a block diagram is shown that more fully illustrates system including the components of the wireless network and interrelation of the elements of the exemplary embodiments. System is merely exemplary and can include any system whereby remote client devices such as wireless client computing devices communicate over the air between and among each other and or between and among components connected via a wireless network including without limitation wireless network carriers and or servers. The application download server and the stored application database communicate with a carrier network through a data link such as the Internet a secure LAN WAN or other network. Stored application database includes a CCM loader according to the above described embodiments for download to each of the wireless client computer devices . Wireless client computer devices download a copy of CCM loader from stored applications database . In the embodiment shown a server can include the application download server distribution server and the stored application database . However these servers can also be independent devices.

Still referring to the embodiment of carrier network controls messages generally being data packets sent to a messaging service controller MSC . Carrier network communicates with the MSC through another communications link such as another network the Internet and or POTS plain ordinary telephone system . Typically the network or Internet connection between carrier network and MSC transfers data and the POTS transfers voice information. MSC may be connected to multiple base stations BTS such as by at least one communications link including both a data network and or the Internet for data transfer and POTS for voice information. BTS ultimately broadcasts messages wirelessly to the wireless communications devices such as cellular telephones in an over the air protocol such as short messaging service SMS etc.

In the embodiment of each wireless device may include a computer platform that can receive and execute software applications and display data transmitted from computer system or other network servers . Computer platform may include an application specific integrated circuit ASIC or other chipset processor microprocessor logic circuit or other data processing device. ASIC may be installed at the time of manufacture of wireless device . ASIC or other processor may execute an application programming interface API layer that interfaces with any resident programs e.g. CCM loader in a memory of the wireless device. API is a runtime environment executing on the computing device or wireless device in this case. One such runtime environment is Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless BREWS software although other runtime environments may be utilized that for example operate to control the execution of applications on wireless computing devices. Memory for example can be comprised of at least one of read only and random access memory ROM and RAM EPROM EEPROM flash cards and any memory common to computer platforms. The computer platform may also include a local database that can hold the software applications e.g. CCM loader CCM files or data not actively used in memory . Local database may include at least one of flash memory cells magnetic media EPROM EEPROM optical media tape a soft disk a hard disk and any other type of secondary or tertiary memory. Thus in the embodiment of each wireless device may be loaded with applications such as CCM loader CCM one or more profiles and or data from computer system in accordance with system .

By using CCM the manufacturer of device is able to configure the device for operation on one or more carrier communication networks e.g. first wireless network and a second wireless network . That is device need not be modified by a vendor or a manufacturer in order to operate on a particular telecommunication carrier s communication network . Additionally an individual carrier need only supply predetermined carrier specific parameters to device in order to enable the device to operate in conjunction with the carrier s network. CCM encapsulates carrier specific parameters in one or more carrier specific profiles for device .

CCM encapsulates the differences in carrier device requirements as parameters e.g. dynamic resource files selectable during operation of device .

In another embodiment CCM is downloadable over the air i.e. device is able to download carrier specific parameters using the device s connection to wireless network . In yet another embodiment CCM is downloadable by a connection to a computer system or via a readable medium connectable to device e.g. a memory card.

In an embodiment a user of device may choose a specific carrier configuration by entering proper inputs on the device directly or remotely. The user may choose to enable device to operate under one of many carriers service providers based on some changes in the users needs e.g. cost geography roaming travel security specific technology e.g. CDMA TDMA OFDMA etc. and the like.

In one embodiment device automatically detects the need to use a predetermined profile stored in CCM . handset manufacturer may choose a specific carrier configuration and customize itself based on some changes in the operating environment and or users needs e.g. roaming and or traveling into a new area entering an area serviced by a specific technology e.g. CDMA TDMA OFDMA etc. and the like.

Using CCM device vendors and manufacturers need not worry about customizing each device to meet each carrier s specific requirements. Device vendors and manufacturers may focus on their market differentiators and use CCM to address carrier s unique requirements. This significantly improves device time to market and quality of devices.

It will be readily seen by one of ordinary skill in the art that the disclosed embodiments fulfill one or more of the advantages set forth above. After reading the foregoing specification one of ordinary skill will be able to affect various changes substitutions of equivalents and various other embodiments as broadly disclosed herein. It is therefore intended that the protection granted hereon be limited only by the definition contained in the appended claims and equivalents thereof.

