---

title: Drift tube amplifier and method to amplify current
abstract: A drift tube amplifier having an input and an output. The drift tube amplifier including a current-to-voltage converter for converting input current to a voltage, a band pass filter assembly for reducing unwanted noise within the voltage, a voltage controlled amplifier for adjusting the output voltage level, and a logarithmic ratio converter for converting the voltage from linear to LOG scale.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07573572&OS=07573572&RS=07573572
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07573572
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050907
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates to an amplifier and method to amplify current. More specifically but without limitation the present invention relates to a drift tube amplifier and method to amplify current that can be used in conjunction with a chemical agent detection system.

Amplifiers are but without limitation mechanisms or devices that make certain outputs greater or larger. Specifically amplifiers may increase the amplitude of something or allow it to be heard or detected easier. The United States Navy utilizes amplifiers in chemical agent detection systems specifically systems that detect nerve and blister agents. These amplifiers must amplify extremely low currents that are produced when ions strike a Faraday Cup. A Faraday Cup may be defined but without limitation as a device for precisely measuring the current carried by a beam of particles.

The United States Navy utilizes Ion Mobility Spectrometry IMS to identify different species of chemical agents including nerve and blister agents. IMS is a gas phase ion separation technique. Ions are formed in a source region accelerated through a potential gradient with a counter current drift gas typically air and the ions collide with a collector typically a Faraday Cup . When an ion collides with the collector the Faraday Cup it induces an extremely small current. The current must be converted and then analyzed by a processor or processor board. The processor board based on the current determines if there is a chemical agent in the air. Since the current is extremely small it must be amplified and transformed in order for the processor board to properly read and analyze any input received. Thus there is a need for an amplifier that can transform and amplify the current into a form such that the current may be read and analyzed.

The present invention is directed to a drift tube amplifier that includes a current to voltage converter for converting extremely low input current to a voltage a band pass filter assembly for reducing unwanted noise within the voltage a voltage controlled amplifier for adjusting the output voltage level and a logarithmic ratio converter for converting the voltage from linear to LOG scale thereby increasing the dynamic range of the output.

It is a feature of the invention to provide a drift tube amplifier that can convert and amplify a low input current to a form that can be read and analyzed specifically by a processor board of a chemical agent detector.

It is a feature of the invention to provide a drift tube amplifier that minimizes saturation of the amplifier and minimizes long negative tails on the signals.

It is a feature of the invention to provide a drift tube amplifier that allows a user or computer to remotely adjust system gain.

The preferred embodiment of the present invention is illustrated by way of example below and in . As seen in the drift tube amplifier includes a current to voltage converter for converting extremely low input current to a voltage a band pass filter assembly for reducing unwanted noise within the voltage a voltage controlled amplifier for adjusting the output voltage level and a logarithmic ratio converter for converting the voltage from linear to LOG scale thereby increasing the dynamic range of the output voltage .

In the description of the present invention the invention will be discussed in a chemical agent detection system environment however this invention can be utilized for any type of need that requires use of an amplifier.

The current to voltage converter converts extremely low input current to a voltage. Typically ion detectors emit a low current that is difficult to detect. In operation this low current would be in ambient air as a result of ions in the air striking a Faraday Cup. The resultant current is the input into the current to voltage converter . The low current is converted by the current to voltage converter into a voltage. As shown in the current to voltage converter may include a converter capacitors and resistors . The preferred converter capacitor and resistor configuration of the current to voltage converter is shown in . The preferred capacitance and resistance of the components are shown in next to each respective component.

After being converted by the current to voltage converter the voltage then passes to and through the band pass filter assembly . The band pass filter assembly reduces noise such as wide band noise and or interference. The band pass filter assembly may be one filter a group of filters with various electronic components or any type of filter configuration practicable. The band pass filter assembly may include a first order band pass filter and a set of inverting and non inverting filters. In the preferred embodiment of the invention as seen in after exiting the current to voltage converter the voltage passes through a first order band pass filter . As seen in the first order band pass filter includes a high pass filter which includes 2 capacitors in series and a low pass filter which includes a filter a capacitor and resistors . The preferred filter capacitor and resistor configuration of the first order band pass filter assembly is shown in . The preferred capacitance and resistance of the components are shown in next to each respective component.

In the preferred embodiment of the invention after leaving the first order band pass filter the voltage enters an inverting non inverting stage. Some chemical agents produce positive ions while other agents produce negative ions. The processor detection algorithms within the processor board of the chemical detection system are typically designed to work with a positive signal only therefore a negative signal current voltage from negative ions must be converted to a positive signal for the chemical detection system to be effective. Negative voltage derived from negative current input which is derived from negative ions enters an inverting second order low pass filter . The inverting second order low pass filter inverts and changes the negative voltage into a positive voltage. Positive voltage derived from positive current input which is derived from positive ions enters a non inverting second order low pass filter . Each of these filters may include resistors and capacitors . The preferred filter capacitor and resistor configuration of the inverting filter and the non inverting filter is shown in . The preferred capacitance and resistance of the components are shown in next to each respective component.

After passing one of the second order low pass filters the inverting or the non inverting the voltage enters a polarity switch whereby the voltage from either second order low pass filter or may be passed to the voltage controlled amplifier . The polarity switch may be electronically controlled by a processor or any type of apparatus practicable.

After leaving the polarity switch the voltage then passes to the voltage controlled amplifier . The voltage controlled amplifier may be attached to a remote gain control . The remote gain control allows the operator a processor or a computer to remotely adjust the output voltage level. The remote gain control may communicate with the voltage controlled amplifier via a DC signal or any type of method practicable. A precision IC multiplier may be used to remotely adjust the amplifier gain. In order to keep unwanted signal interference to a minimum a DC gain control configuration may be utilized. This allows the aggressive filtering of disruptive 60Hz line power interference. The preferred electronic configuration of the remote control gain is shown in . The gain is controlled via adjusting Vin Equation 1 Vis a DC Voltage using a remote potentiometer for manual adjustment or a digital to analog converter DAC for computer control in the automatic gain control AGC mode. In the preferred embodiment of the invention the gain control is described by the following equation 

After the output voltage level is adjusted the voltage then enters a logarithmic ratio converter which converts the voltage from linear to logarithmic LOG scale. This conversion creates a compressive effect and increases the dynamic range of the output . In the preferred embodiment of the invention the following equation represents the general form of the conversion of the logarithmic ratio converter 

In the preferred embodiment the logarithmic ratio converter includes a log ratio amplifier a scaling amplifier and a second order low pass filter . The log ratio amplifier computes the log ratio of an input current relative to the reference current. After passing through the log ratio amplifier the voltage now in LOG form then enters the scaling amplifier that shifts and scales the output level to the desired range for the system processor or processor board typically configured from about 0 to about 10 V . The voltage then passes through the second order low pass filter and then to an output buffer . The logarithmic ratio converter may include capacitors resistors filters and amplifiers. The preferred filter capacitor and resistor configuration of the logarithmic ratio converter is shown in . The preferred capacitance and resistance of the components are shown in .

The output buffer may include a first order low pass filter as well as capacitors and resistors . After exiting the output buffer the voltage output is then passed to a processing board to determine if any and or what kind of chemical agents are present. The preferred filter capacitor and resistor configuration of the output buffer is shown in . The preferred capacitance and resistance of the components are shown in .

In addition as seen in the drift tube amplifier may include decoupling capacitors . The decoupling capacitors are electronically communicating with the drift tube amplifier such that the decoupling capacitors reduce power noise from any type of power source used. The decoupling capacitors may be disposed between the power source and the drift tube amplifier specifically between the power source and the components of the drift tube amplifier that are being supplied power . The decoupling capacitors also may minimize glitches on the power supply induced during signal transitions within active semiconductor integrated circuits.

The method to amplify current includes converting a current to a voltage reducing unwanted noise within the voltage adjusting the output voltage level and converting the voltage from linear to LOG scale thereby increasing the dynamic range of the output. The output voltage level may be adjusted by passing the voltage through a band pass filter assembly or a series of filters. The preferred band pass filter assembly is described above. The output voltage level may be adjusted utilizing a remote gain control and may be adjusted utilizing the configuration described above. The voltage may be converted utilizing a system described above.

When introducing elements of the present invention or the preferred embodiment s thereof the articles a an the and said are intended to mean there are one or more of the elements. The terms comprising including and having are intended to be inclusive and mean that there may be additional elements other than the listed elements.

Although the present invention has been described in considerable detail with reference to certain preferred embodiments thereof other embodiments are possible. Therefore the spirit and scope of the appended claims should not be limited to the description of the preferred embodiments contained herein.

