---

title: Method for improving false acceptance rate discriminating for biometric authentication systems
abstract: A method, system and computer program product for improving error discrimination in biometric authentication systems. The error discrimination is set to a predetermined security policy. A plurality of biometric samples are provided and authenticated by a computer system in conjunction with a security token. An alternate embodiment allows inputting of the plurality of biometric samples in a predetermined sequence. The predetermined input sequence is maintained as an authentication secret which may be used to further reduce the authentication transaction error rate. A user may input one or more biometric samples, where a portion of the biometric samples are inputted in a predetermined sequence, selecting from among a plurality of available processing units, a set of processing units which will generate intermediate results from the processing of the biometric samples, processing at least a portion of the biometric samples by the selected set of processing units to provide intermediate results, verifying the predetermined sequence, and arbitrating the intermediate results to generate a final result which at least meets a predetermined security policy. Various embodiments provide for a security token to perform at least a portion of the processing or the arbitration function.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08014570&OS=08014570&RS=08014570
owner: ActivCard, Inc.
number: 08014570
owner_city: Fremont
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051110
---
The present invention relates generally to a data processing method system and computer program product and more specifically to a method system and computer program product for performing multiple biometric sample authentications incorporating a security token for meeting or favorably exceeding a predetermined error rate.

The use of biometrics for user verification and identification purposes is becoming increasingly popular in the computer industry. One of the major advantages in using biometrics is the reduction in the number of usernames and passwords a user has to memorize to access a computer system or secure resources. However unlike traditional usernames and passwords where exact matches are made between entered and reference passwords biometric authentications are probabilistic in nature.

An acceptable tolerance range is required to compensate for variations encountered due to physiological and environmental changes differing signal to noise ratios processing algorithm differences and other influences which impact the matching of an inputted biometric sample to an enrolled reference biometric template. The inclusion of the acceptable tolerance range for matching between an inputted biometric sample and a reference biometric template affects the accuracy of the biometric identification system by either falsely rejecting a valid input or falsely accepting an invalid input. These undesired effects are generally expressed in terms of a false rejection rate FRR and a false acceptance rate FAR . The false rejection and false acceptance rates are generally determined empirically from a statistically significant biometric sampling population.

For example one of the most commonly employed biometric features utilizes fingerprints to perform biometric identifications. In the relevant art fingerprint biometric identification systems which utilize a single fingerprint have been empirically determined to have identification accuracies in the range of 95 99 . This range is probably adequate for many implementations where false acceptance is of secondary importance to false rejection. For example replacement of the standard username password login with a biometric input on a home computer system.

The use of biometrics may simplify access by various family members by eliminating the need to remember username password combinations. In the home environment the population of users and the number of authentication transactions conducted are of a sufficiently small size that the chances of encountering an undesired result are negligible. Furthermore even if a false acceptance were to occur the information being protected is unlikely to be of such significant economic value to warrant the expense of providing greater protections.

On the other hand in an enterprise or governmental setting where large numbers of identification transactions occur and the information being protected may have significant economic value and or is otherwise highly sensitive this authentication accuracy range becomes exceedingly inadequate particularly when large populations are to be identified. When large populations are to be identified the false acceptance rate FAR tends to increase geometrically. A detailed discussion of this phenomenon and a proposed solution is provided in U.S. Pat. No. 6 160 903 to a common inventor assignee. This patent is herein incorporated by reference.

In high security implementations the US National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST have recently promulgated a requirement in their draft specification Derived Test Requirements for FIPS PUB 140 2 Security policy requirements for Cryptographic Modules Feb. 12 2003 of a false acceptance to be less than 1 1 000 000. To accomplish this level of security various mechanisms have been proposed in the relevant art.

For example US patent application 2001 0126881 A1 to Langley discloses a multi biometric scanner processor arrangement in which two or more biometric features of a user are scanned simultaneously. This arrangement reduces the probability of a false acceptance by P of the false acceptance probabilities where Pis the probability of false acceptance and n is the number of entered biometric samples. Using the false acceptance probability of 0.05 would require about five independent biometric inputs to exceed the 1 1 000 000 threshold requirements.

In another example U.S. Pat. No. 6 393 139 B1 to Min Hsiung Lin discloses a multi biometric input arrangement which requires a specific sample entry sequence. The patent further discloses an enrollment method which determines a quality factor for each biometric input for deciding which biometric inputs are suitable for the entry sequence. This arrangement further reduces the false acceptance probability by at least P n P where Pis the probability of entry of an independent sample input Pis the probability of false acceptance and n is the number of entered biometric samples. In this example using the false acceptance probability of 0.05 would require less than five independent biometric inputs to exceed the 1 1 000 000 threshold requirements. Thus by adding a unique sequence to a biometric authentication process the total number of biometric authentications may be reduced.

In another example U.S. Pat. No. 6 408 290 to Thiesson et at. discloses improved Bayesian networks. The Bayesian networks provide the advantages of a neural network which facilitates expert decision making using dynamic system inputs such as those frequently encountered in biometric authentication systems. However the Thiesson reference does not address how the Bayesian networks may be implemented in biometric identification systems to discriminate against false acceptances.

Thus it would be highly advantageous to provide a mechanism where a combination of multiple biometric sample inputs from related and or unrelated physiological features of a user are evaluated using either a Bayesian network or security policy based arrangement to meet or exceed predetermined error rate.

Additional background information relative to combining biometric authentication transactions to reduce error rates is included in the following treatises and patents which are herein incorporated by reference 

Some of the embodiments described herein address the limitations described above and provide a mechanism for reducing the false acceptance rate s associated with biometric authentications to a predetermined level.

IN some embodiments one or more biometric samples are provided and authenticated by a computer system and a security token or a security token alone. Biometric sample processing is generally performed using a computer system an authentication server or a combination thereof with final arbitration of a result performed by a security token.

The term security token as described herein includes hardware based security devices such as cryptographic modules smart cards integrated circuit chip cards portable data carriers PDC personal security devices security token subscriber identification modules SIM wireless identification modules WIM USB token dongles identification tokens secure application modules SAM hardware security modules HSM secure multi media token SMMC trusted platform computing alliance chips TPCA and like devices.

Some method embodiments described herein comprise inputting one or more biometric samples from a user selecting from among a plurality of available processing units a set of processing units which will generate intermediate results from the processing of the one or more biometric samples processing at least a portion of the one or more biometric samples by the selected set of processing units to at least provide the intermediate results and arbitrating by the security token the intermediate results to generate a final result which at least meets a predetermined security policy. In one embodiment at least a portion of the security policy is maintained as a secret by the security token.

In one embodiment the arbitration comprises implementation of one or more logic based rules verification that generation of the final result will be within an acceptable boundary associated with the predetermined security policy a vote determined from the intermediate results or a combination thereof or matching of intermediate results by the security token using reference biometric templates stored inside the security token.

In another embodiment the processing of the biometric sample s may be performed recursively sequentially or a combination thereof among the selected set of processing units.

In an embodiment selection of the processing units is determined at least in part heuristically and or by implementation of one or more pre established security policies and or by quality factors and or matching scores determined from the one or more biometric samples. In another embodiment the plurality of processing units comprises a plurality of discrete biometric processing applications distributed among one or more networked computer systems.

In another embodiment the intermediate results are generated in a standardized format usable by two or more of the selected set of processing units. This allows one processing unit to act as a preprocessor for another processing unit.

In an embodiment the biometric sample s are inputted in a predetermined sequence which is verified as part of an authentication process. The predetermined sequence is maintained as secret known to at least the user.

In one embodiment the plurality of available processing units comprises a plurality of discrete biometric processing applications which may exist on a single computer system or distributed among a plurality of computer systems and an authentication server.

Some method embodiments comprise inputting by a user a plurality of biometric samples where at least a portion of the plurality of biometric samples are inputted in a predetermined sequence selecting from among a plurality of available processing units a set of processing units which will generate intermediate results from the processing of the inputted one or more biometric samples processing at least a portion of the one or more biometric samples by the selected set of processing units to at least provide the intermediate results verifying the predetermined sequence and arbitrating the intermediate results to generate a final result which at least meets a predetermined security policy. In such embodiments the arbitrating is performed by a security token. Again at least a portion of the predetermined security policy is maintained as a secret by the security token.

The arbitration process may comprise implementation of one or more logic based rules verification that generation of the final result will be within an acceptable boundary associated with the predetermined security policy a vote determined from the intermediate results or a combination thereof.

The predetermined sequence may be a secret known to the user and may be inputted serially simultaneously or a combination thereof.

In an embodiment the biometric sample s may arise from similar anatomical features dissimilar anatomical features or a combination thereof.

In another embodiment the plurality of available processing units may comprise a plurality of discrete biometric processing applications which may be distributed among a plurality of computer systems and an authentication server.

In any of the above discussed method embodiments the predetermined security policy may be stored locally to the computer system retrieved from the security token or may be a part of an overall system security policy.

System embodiments may include at least one computer system and an operatively coupled security token. The at least one computer system may include one or more operatively coupled biometric input devices and a plurality of biometric processing devices. The plurality of biometric processing devices may provide the at least one computer system with the functionality to 

select from among the plurality of biometric processing devices a set of biometric processing devices which will generate intermediate results from the processing of the inputted one or more of biometric samples 

process at least a portion of the one or more biometric samples by the selected set of biometric processing devices to at least provide the intermediate results and

arbitrate the intermediate results to generate a final result which at least meets said predetermined security policy where at least a portion of the processing or the arbitration is performed by the security token.

In an embodiment the biometric sample s are inputted in a predetermined sequence which includes both serial and simultaneous inputting. In a related embodiment the set of biometric processing devices further includes a verifier that verifies the predetermined sequence.

In another embodiment the processing of the biometric sample s may be performed recursively sequentially or a combination thereof among the set of biometric processing devices where the set of biometric processing devices is distributed among a plurality of computer systems and an authentication server.

Another systematic embodiment may include at least one computer system including a first processor a security token interface coupled to the first processor a first memory operatively coupled to the first processor one or more biometric scanners is coupled to said first processor a biometric datastore operatively coupled to the first processor having a plurality of reference biometric templates retrievably stored therein and at least one biometric processing application operatively stored in at least a portion of the first memory.

The at least one biometric processing application having logical instructions executable by the first processor to select from among a plurality of available biometric processing applications a set of biometric processing applications which will generate intermediate results by processing one or more biometric samples received from the one or more biometric scanners cause at least a portion of the one or more biometric samples to be processed by the selected set of biometric processing applications to at least provide the intermediate results and cause the intermediate results to be arbitrated into a final result.

The system may further comprise a security token including a second processor a second memory at least one of the plurality of reference biometric templates operatively stored in at least a portion of the second memory and at least one token biometric processing application operatively stored in at least another portion of the second memory having logical instructions executable by the second processor to perform the arbitration to determine the final result in accordance with the predetermined security policy stored in yet another portion of the second memory.

The set of biometric processing applications or at least one token biometric processing application may further include logical instructions executable by the first or second processor to allow access to one or more secure resources if the final result is affirmative.

In another embodiment the one or more biometric samples may be input in a predetermined sequence and verified by either the set of biometric processing applications or the least one token biometric processing application. The predetermined sequence is intended to be maintained as a secret known to at least the user.

The plurality of available biometric processing applications may be distributed among a plurality of computer systems and an authentication server in a distributed processing arrangement.

The portion of the one or more biometric samples to be processed by said plurality of available biometric processing applications units is dependent on the type of biometric sample being processed and on the processing being used. For example some processing algorithms convert a fingerprint into a series of vectors others utilize optical scanning techniques still others determines capacitive changes in a grid.

A computer program product includes programs and associated data recorded on optical magnetic or logical transportable digital recording media such as a CD ROM floppy disk data tape DVD flash RAM or removable hard disk for installation on a security token enabled client and or authentication server and or security token. The programs and associated data may be stored on the transportable digital recording media in a code format including byte code compiled interpreted compliable and interpretable.

Some embodiments described herein provide a mechanism for reducing the false error rate associated with biometric authentication systems to meet or exceed a predetermined security policy. The applications may be programmed in a high level language such as Java C C C or Visual Basic .

Referring to a functional block diagram of a computer system and associated peripherals is shown including a processor a main memory a display electrically coupled to a display interface a secondary memory subsystem electrically coupled to a hard disk drive a removable storage drive electrically coupled to a removable storage unit and an auxiliary removable storage interface electrically coupled to an auxiliary removable storage unit . The display device may include a touch sensitive screen to simplify user inputs.

A communications interface subsystem is coupled to a network via a network interface . The network includes traditional wired optical or wireless networks which preferably incorporates a secure communications protocol comprising secure socket layer SSL transport layer security TLS private communications technology PCT or internet protocol security IPsec. 

A security token is operably coupled to the communications interface via a security token interface . User input devices such as a mouse and a keyboard are operatively coupled to the communications interface via a user interface . Lastly one or more biometric scanners are operatively coupled to the communications interface via a biometric scanner interface .

The processor main memory display interface secondary memory subsystem and communications interface system are electrically coupled to a communications infrastructure commonly known as I O bus. The computer system includes an operating system one or biometric processing applications a security token application programming interface one or more security token aware applications cryptography software capable of performing symmetric and asymmetric cryptographic functions secure messaging software and all necessary device interface and driver software.

The security token includes a wireless optical and or electrical connection means compatible with the security token interface a microprocessor a cryptography co processor volatile and non volatile memory electrically coupled to the processor and co processor a runtime operating environment cryptography extensions available to the runtime environment and capable of performing symmetric and asymmetric cryptographic functions compatible with the computer system s cryptography software a security executive application one or more biometric result arbitration applications and at optionally at least one reference biometric template.

The security executive application includes the ability to receive one or more intermediate results provided by the one or more biometric processing applications installed on the computer system CS . In distributed processing embodiments a plurality of computer systems are interconnected by a network and include at least one biometric processing application installed per computer system. In the distributed processing embodiments an authentication server may be employed which allows the accumulation of biometric processing statistics for determination of the most appropriate biometric processing application s for a particular type of biometric sample under a particular set of sampling conditions. The accumulation of biometric processing statistics may further be used to heuristically modify the initial security policies settings which control the use of a particular biometric processing application.

The biometric samples input by a user may be selectively processed by one or more of computer systems to generate the intermediate results for final arbitration by the security token . The selection of biometric processing applications and or computer systems used in processing the biometric sample s is controlled by one or more security policies installed on the computer system security token or both. The combination of biometric processing applications and computer systems is referred to generically as processing units.

The security policies may be arranged as described in co pending U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 402 960 filed on Apr. 1 2003 entitled Uniform Framework for Security Tokens published on Jun. 24 2004 as U.S. Patent App. Pub. No. 2004 0123152 A1 and Ser. No. 10 425 028 filed on Apr. 29 2003 entitled Uniform Modular Framework For A Host Computer System published on Nov. 4 2004 as U.S. Patent App. Pub. No. 2004 0221174 A1 to a common inventor assignee both of which are herein incorporated by reference. The security policies includes but are not limited to access control rules biometric processing methodology private or partial enrollment information and biometric processing sequences.

The biometric scanner s may be of the same type for receiving biometric samples having like biometric characteristics for example fingerprints or dissimilar types of biometric scanners to receive biometric samples having differing characteristics i.e. multi modal biometric authentication which allows combinations of biometric sample inputs for example fingerprints and iris scans.

Referring to a plurality of biometric processing applications App App App App App App provides the computer system with the functionalities to receive one or more biometric samples input by the user via the biometric scanner s perform the necessary data processing to extract the pertinent biometric features of interest associated with the particular type s of biometric samples inputted generate a plurality of intermediate results from the processed biometric samples in conjunction with reference biometric template data stored in a biometric database DB and send the intermediate results to the security token ST for final arbitration by an arbitration application Arb installed inside the security token ST . The intermediate results may be a plurality of sample biometric templates used for comparison with the retrieved reference biometric templates quality factors for determining additional processing needs matching scores votes results of processing an input sequence or a combination thereof.

In some embodiments the token security executive application Sec Exec and the token arbitration application Arb are intended to be plug in modules which interface with a standardized token application programming interface not shown such as that described in GlobalPlatform Card Specification v2.1.1 March 2003. The GlobalPlatform specification is available at www.globalplatform.org. The arbitration application Arb may include the ability to perform a biometric authentication transaction in addition to arbitration.

The number of biometric processing applications App App App App App App is arbitrarily shown as six. The actual number of biometric processing applications may be tailored to meet a specific security policy.

In some embodiments the biometric processing application s are coupled to a standardized biometric application programming interface BioAPI such as BioAPI developed by the BioAPI Consortium. A description of the proposed biometric application programming interface is described in BioAPI Specification Version 1.1 Mar. 16 2001 and is available at www.bioapi.org. One skilled in the art will appreciate that a single biometric application having different invokable methods functions or subroutines will work with or without a standardized biometric applications programming interface.

In some embodiments the token s security executive application Sec Exec in conjunction with the token arbitration application Arb and either or both the token and or computer system s security policies SPt SPc becomes the final gatekeeper to allow an authenticated user to access one or more secure resources. The security policy SPc associated with the computer system CS is optional and may be retrieved or derived from the token security policy SPt . The biometric database DB includes a plurality of reference biometric templates which are retrievable by using a variable unique to the user. The variable is a unique token identifier or serial number associated with both the user and security token. The reference biometric templates may be compared with one or more of the intermediate processing results as part of a user authentication process.

Referring to a designated set of biometric processing applications App App App are selected by either or both the token and or computer system s security policies SPc SPt to receive a plurality of biometric samples input by a user via the biometric scanner s 

The selected set of biometric processing applications App App App performs the data processing in conjunction with related information retrieved from the biometric database DB for extracting the pertinent biometric features of interest associated with the particular type s of biometric samples inputted for generating a plurality of intermediate results for final arbitration by the security token ST . The processing of the inputted biometric samples may be performed either in parallel or in series.

In some embodiments one biometric processing application may preprocess a biometric sample for another biometric processing application based on a particular security policy. In other embodiments additional authentication requirements are provided for which requires the user to input his or her biometric samples in a predetermined sequence. The sequence is maintained as a secret by the user and is used to further reduce the overall false acceptance rate particularly in situations where a required false acceptance rate would be difficult to achieve using the particular types of biometric samples provided. The predetermined sequence may be stored locally on the computer system CS as part of the computer system s security policy SPc or retrieved from the security token ST as part of the token security policy SPt

Depending on the level of security required the biometric sample input sequence may be used to supplement deficiencies encountered during the user authentication process should one or more of the biometric sample templates fail authentication or if the user incorrectly inputs his or her biometric samples in the wrong order. In the highest level of security both the user authentication process and biometric sample input sequence must be correct before allowing access to the one or more secure resources. This arrangement is indicative of an AND security policy.

In reduced levels of security deficiencies encountered during the user authentication process or biometric sample input sequence may still allow access to secure resources if the required false acceptance rate can still be achieved. This arrangement is indicative of an OR security policy.

Combining biometric authentication through an AND operation improves the false acceptance rate at the expense of the false rejection rate while combining biometric authentication through an OR operation improves the false rejection rate at the expense of the false acceptance rate.

This is one of the many security policy decisions necessary to balance security and user convenience. In related embodiments both the minimum number of authenticated biometric samples and provided in the proper sequence are required before access is allowed to one or more secure resources. The required sequence for example may include a combination of fingerprints obtained from the same or differing fingers from either or both hands or a combination of fingerprints and iris scans provided in a predetermined order. One skilled in the art will appreciate that the many combinations of biometric sample inputs may be used to provide a secret biometric sample input sequence.

Referring to the designated biometric processing application s App App App send their processed intermediate results IR to the security token ST for final arbitration. The security executive application Sec Exec in conjunction with the token security policy SPt and arbitration application Arb determines a final result from the received intermediate results IR .

Referring to a distributed processing embodiment is shown which allows a plurality of computer systems and an authentication server are interconnected by a network to perform different biometric processing tasks which are arbitrated by a security token ST connected to one of the computer systems

In addition the inclusion of the authentication server allows the accumulation of biometric processing statistics in the biometric database DB for determining the most appropriate biometric processing application s for a particular type of biometric sample under a particular sampling condition. The accumulation of biometric processing statistics may further be used to heuristically modify the initial security policies settings which control the use of a particular biometric processing application.

The types of biometric statistics accumulated include biometric sample type information biometric authentication success rates biometric image quality factors matching scores biometric processing progressions associated with routing and advantageous sequential processing by a series of processing units over time.

The distribution of biometric processing applications among the plurality of computer systems may be varied to optimize processing performance and adjust for bandwidth considerations. The distributed biometric processing applications and computer systems will hereinafter be referred to generically as processing units.

Referring to a diagrammatic presentation of an illustrative embodiment is depicted which receives one or more biometric samples of a related type. A series of processing units N N N N N N are in processing communications with each other and an arbitrator . The processing units N N N N N N includes separate computer systems separate biometric processing applications within a single computer system and a combination of separate biometric processing applications distributed among various networked computer systems. The arbitrator is a security token. In this arrangement the one or more biometric samples of a related type e.g. fingerprints are received by the processing network at the entry units and or

Depending on the type of logic arrangement employed security policy heuristic or hybrid the biometric samples are initially processed by either or both of the input processing units N N to produce one or more intermediate results not shown . The input processing units N N perform initial attempts to match the sample biometric templates against one or more reference biometric templates not shown or determine quality factors used to distribute the biometric samples to the processing units most suited to processing the biometric samples having the associated quality factors. The quality factors may be based on image quality or signal to noise ratios. The capabilities of each processing unit N N N N N N may be determined heuristically or empirically.

In some embodiments the intermediate results are generated in a standardized format which allows one processing unit to act as a preprocessor for another processing unit. An example of a standardized file format is described in NISTIR 6529 Common Biometric Exchange File Format CBEFF by the National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST Jan. 3 2001 available at www.itl.nist.gov div895 isis bc cbeff. If the initial attempt to match or process one or more of the biometric samples is unsuccessful the processed intermediate results or original biometric samples may be routed to another processing unit for further processing. In heuristic embodiments an authentication server accumulates biometric sample type information biometric authentication success rates quality factors matching scores and preferable processing progressions associated with routing and sequential processing by the processing units and related information over time.

For example a biometric sample having certain characteristics or quality factors may always fail to be processed by processing unit N but may generally be successfully processed by processing unit N . Rather than attempting to process the biometric sample using processing unit N the network routes the biometric sample directly to processing unit N

Analogously the biometric samples may be processed sequentially by one or more of the processing units N N N N N N including a processing unit already attempted before being processed by another processing unit if the probability of a match based on the resulting characteristics of the processed sample are increased. Once processing by the processing units has been completed the intermediate results are arbitrated by the security token to determine a final result authenticated or not. The accumulated information facilitates learning among the processing units of which particular processing unit s and or processing progressions provides the best solution under a given situation or biometric sample characteristic.

In a security policy based processing arrangement the incoming biometric samples are initially processed by either or both of the input processing units N N to produce one or more intermediate results not shown . The input processing units N N may perform initial attempts to match the sample biometric templates against one or more reference biometric templates not shown retrieved from the biometric database DB or determine quality factors from the inputted biometric samples for further processing by additional processing units. In this arrangement a simple rule dictates where subsequent processing of the biometric sample s by another processing unit if any will occur.

Similar rules using standard Boolean and or arithmetic operators may be developed for each of the processing units N N N N N N which optimize matching probability error rate discrimination and or processing performance between and among the processing units. One skilled in the arts will appreciate that multiple combinations of both heuristic and security policy processing arrangements may be employed.

Alternately or in combination therewith the arbitrator may include logic for verifying that generation of a final authentication decision will be within an acceptable boundary associated with a predetermined security policy as described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 160 903 to a common inventor assignee. In some embodiments which may be implemented alone or in combination with either of the preceding security policies allows an arbitrator to determine a final authentication decision by a vote determined from the results received from the processing units N N N N N N . The voting process may be weighted to favor the intermediate results of one or more of the processing units N N N N N N as determined heuristically or empirically. In voting embodiments each of the selected group of processing units performs an authentication transaction and provides a pass fail 0 1 intermediate result to the arbitrator which determines the final result .

In other embodiments a scoring arrangement is provided which allows the arbitrator to determine acceptability of the inputted biometric samples for authentication purposes based on a combined score determined from the individual scores provided by the processing units . The individual scores are determined from a fraction of matched features between the sample intermediate results and the reference biometric template s .

In other embodiments the processing units generate a sample biometric template which is used in providing a simple matching result i.e. YES NO or 0 1 which are then sent to the security token for final arbitration. Alternately the processing units may generate one or more sample biometric templates which are sent to the security token for matching as part of the final arbitration process.

In other embodiments each of the biometric processing units may utilizes a different biometric processing application so that the extraction of relevant biometric features from the inputted biometric sample s may be optimized to address variations in sampling conditions. A summary of the various arbitration arrangements is provided in Table 1 which follows. Alternately the same biometric processing application may be applied to differing biometric samples inputted by the user. For example the user may provide input fingerprints originating from different fingers which are processed by the same biometric processing algorithm.

Referring to a diagrammatic presentation is depicted which receives one or more biometric samples of a dissimilar types for example a fingerprint and an iris scan. In this embodiment the processing units N N N are designed for processing of one biometric sample type and processing units N N N are designed for dissimilar biometric sample type . In this embodiment there is limited crossover processing capability between processing units N N N and N N N due to differences in processing of the inputted biometric samples.

One skilled in the art will appreciate that some common image or signal processing may occur but is expected to be considerably less than that described for like biometric sample types. Other aspects of this embodiment are analogous to the description provided for above where the arbitrator determines the final result of the intermediate processing results performed by the processing units N N N N N N

Referring to the major steps involved in implementing one embodiment are illustrated. The process is initiated by a user inputting one or more biometric samples into one or more biometric scanners according to an existing security policy .

Based on the inputted biometric sample type and or heuristically derived information a set of processing units is selected which will generate a set of biometric sample templates according to the security policy . The inputted biometric samples are then processed using the selected set of biometric processing units to generate one or more of biometric sample templates for use in one or more authentication transactions . Once the biometric sample templates are generated one or more authentication transactions are performed by comparing the generated biometric sample templates with a reference set of biometric templates retrieved from a biometric database.

In some embodiments the majority of biometric samples templates are authenticated by a computer system and a subset may be authenticated by a security token or another computer system.

Depending on the applicable security policies or heuristics if one or more biometric sample templates fail to be authenticated by the computer system processing ends and the user is denied access to one or more secure resources . This arrangement is indicative of an AND security policy which requires all authentications to be successful.

If all the biometric sample templates intended to be authenticated by the computer system are authenticated by the computer system s the remaining unauthenticated subset of biometric sample templates is sent to the security token for authentication. If any member of the subset of biometric sample templates fails authentication by the security token or another computer system processing ends and the user is denied access to one or more secure resources . This arrangement is again indicative of the AND security policy which requires all authentications to be successful.

However in an OR security policy not all of the biometric sample templates must be authenticated by the computer system s . The failed biometric sample template s may be authenticated by the security token or another computer system. If the security token or another computer system is unable to authenticate the failed biometric sample template s or the subset of the biometric sample templates processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources .

This arrangement is indicative of a combination OR and AND security policy which requires all authentications to be successful but not necessarily on a single processing unit. If the security token or another computer system successfully authenticates the received biometric sample template s a final authentication transaction is performed to determine if a sufficient number of biometric sample templates have been authenticated to meet a predetermined error rate or security policy for example a FAR of 1E 6.

If a sufficient number of biometric sample templates have been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy the user is allowed access to the one or more secure resources . If however an insufficient number of biometric sample templates have been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources .

Alternately in a final OR security policy not all of the biometric sample templates must be authenticated by the computer system another computer system or the security token . If a sufficient number of biometric sample templates have been authenticated to still meet the predetermined security policy the user is allowed access to the one or more secure resources . If however an insufficient number of biometric sample templates have not been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources .

Referring to the major steps involved in implementing alternate embodiments are illustrated. The process is initiated by a user sequentially inputting a plurality of biometric samples into one or more biometric scanners according to an existing security policy where the input sequence is maintained as an additional authentication requirement.

Based on the inputted biometric sample type and or heuristically derived information a set of processing units is selected which will generate a set of sample biometric templates according to the security policy . The inputted plurality of biometric samples are then processed by the selected set of processing units computer systems security token and or biometric processing applications to generate a plurality of sample biometric templates for use in a plurality of authentication transactions .

A plurality of authentication transactions is then performed by comparing the generated biometric sample templates with a reference set of biometric templates retrieved from a biometric datastore or database. In some embodiments the majority of biometric samples templates are authenticated by a computer system or another computer system and a subset authenticated by a security token. Depending on the applicable security policies if one or more biometric sample templates fail to be authenticated by the computer system processing ends and the user is denied access to one or more secure resources .

This arrangement is indicative of an AND security policy which requires all authentications to be successful. If all the biometric sample templates intended to be authenticated by the computer system are authenticated the remaining unauthenticated subset of biometric sample templates is sent to the security token or another computer system for authentication . If any member of the subset of biometric sample templates fails authentication by the security token or another computer system processing ends and the user is denied access to one or more secure resources . This arrangement is again indicative of the AND security policy which requires all authentications to be successful.

However in an OR security policy not all of the biometric sample templates must be authenticated by the computer system. The failed biometric sample template s may be authenticated by a security token or another computer system. If the security token or another computer system is unable to authenticate the failed biometric sample template s or the subset of the biometric sample templates processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources . This arrangement is indicative of a combination OR and AND security policies which requires all authentications to be successful but not necessarily on a single processing unit.

If the security token successfully authenticates the received biometric sample templates another authentication transaction is performed to determine if a sufficient number of biometric sample templates have been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy . If a sufficient number of biometric sample templates have been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy the user is allow access to the one or more secure resources . If however an insufficient number of biometric sample templates have not been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources .

Alternately in another OR security policy not all of the biometric sample templates must be authenticated by the computer system or security token . If a sufficient number of biometric sample templates have been authenticated to still meet the predetermined security policy the user is allow access to the one or more secure resources . If however an insufficient number of biometric sample templates have not been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources .

In another AND security policy if all of the biometric sample templates are authenticated by the computer system the or another computer system and or security token a final authentication transaction is performed to determine if the biometric samples were entered in the proper sequence . If the biometric samples were entered in the proper sequence the user is allowed access to the one or more secure resources . If however the biometric sample were not entered in the proper sequence processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources . It will be appreciated by one skilled in the art that other combinations of AND and OR security policies may be established to accomplish a particular security state or implement a particular security policy.

In a final OR security policy if not all of the biometric sample templates are authenticated by the computer system the or another computer system and or security token a final authentication transaction is performed to determine if the biometric samples were entered in the proper sequence . If the biometric samples were not entered in the proper sequence but a sufficient number have been authenticated to still meet the predetermined security policy the user is allow access to the one or more secure resources . If however an insufficient number of biometric sample templates have not been authenticated to meet the predetermined security policy processing ends and the user is denied access to the one or more secure resources .

Referring to the major steps involved in other embodiments are illustrated. The process is initiated by a user inputting a plurality of biometric samples into one or more biometric scanners according to an existing security policy. As before a predetermined sequence may be required to meet a predetermined security policy or required by the security policy for other reasons. Based on the inputted biometric sample type and or heuristically derived information a set of processing units or biometric applications is selected which will generate the intermediate results .

The inputted plurality of biometric samples are then processed by the selected set of processing units computer systems security token and or biometric processing units to generate the intermediate results . The input sequence is then verified if required by the existing security policy followed by arbitration of the intermediate results to determine a final result and normal processing termination . In one embodiment of a security token performs a portion of the processing to generate the intermediate results. In other embodiments the security token performs the arbitration functions.

Referring to the major steps involved in implementing other embodiments are illustrated. In these embodiments the security policy requirements may include quality factors matching scores ability to obtain a vote and biometric sample input sequence verification. Some or all of the security policy requirements may be provided. The process is initiated by a user inputting one or more biometric samples into one or more biometric scanners according to existing security policy requirements. As before a set of processing units is selected according to the existing security policy which will generate the intermediate results . The selected processing units then process the inputted biometric samples to produce the intermediate results . A portion of the intermediate results is verified to determine if the quality of results is sufficient to meet the existing security policy . If the quality of results does not meet the existing security policy requirements processing ends . If the quality of results does meet the meet the existing security policy requirements processing continues by verifying that the matching scores generated by the selected processing units meets the existing security policy requirements . If the generated matching scores does not meet the existing security policy requirements processing ends .

If the generated matching scores do meet the meet the existing security policy requirements processing continues by determining if a proper vote can be arbitrated according to the existing security policy requirements . If a proper vote cannot be made according to the existing security policy requirements processing ends . If a proper vote can be made according to the existing security policy requirements processing continues by determining if the biometric samples were inputted in the proper sequence according to the existing security policy requirements . If the proper biometric sample input sequence has not been entered according to the existing security policy requirements processing ends . If the proper biometric sample input sequence has been entered according to the existing security policy requirements the user is allowed access to one or more secure resources followed by normal processing termination .

The foregoing described embodiments are provided as illustrations and descriptions. They are not intended to limit the invention to precise form described. In particular it is contemplated that functional implementations described herein may be implemented equivalently in hardware software firmware and or other available functional components or building blocks. No specific limitation is intended to a particular security system or financial services system. Other variations and embodiments are possible in light of above teachings and it is not intended that this Detailed Description limit the scope of the invention but rather such scope is limited only by the claims following herein.

