---

title: Rapid screening and analysis of present and potential nerve agents and their degradation products
abstract: Methods are described for detecting organophosphorus compounds in a sample.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07291478&OS=07291478&RS=07291478
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07291478
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050329
---
The present invention relates to chemical agent detection and more particularly to methods of determining the presence of organophosphorus based compounds.

This patent application is related to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 131 996 entitled Method for Detecting G and V Agents of Chemical Warfare and Their Degradation Products filed on Apr. 23 2002 which is hereby incorporated by reference herein to the extent there is no conflict.

Organophosphorus compounds are highly toxic to many organisms including humans. Such compounds including for example sarin cyclosarin soman and tabun are also used as nerve agents for chemical warfare applications. These agents are some of the most potent toxic agents and are specific inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase AChE . These inhibitors induce ACHE poisoning in humans corresponding to the accumulation of acetylcholine at all cholinergic receptor terminals which results in blockage of neural signal transmissions. These nerve agents are generally classified into G agents e.g. GD soman GB sarin and GA tabun and V agents e.g. VX .

The various nerve agents differ in physical properties for example VX has a much lower vapor pressure than the G agents. However the toxicity and main effects of the agents are very similar inhibition of acetylcholinesterase that results in subsequent breakdown of the normal operation of the autonomic and central nervous systems. Rapid and reliable detection of organophosphorus compounds is of paramount importance to prevent casualties due to exposure to such compounds.

Organophosphorus compounds contain at least one phosphorous atom chemically bonded directly or indirectly to a carbon skeleton. The phosphorous atom may be a member of an organic chain or ring system in which phosphorous is bonded directly to carbon or phosphorous may be the central atom in a functional group which in turn is bonded to a carbon containing chain or ring. Such functional groups commonly have one or more oxygen atoms or hydroxyl OH groups surrounding the phosphorous atom. These compounds are generally represented by the Formula I 

Recent events involving terrorism around many parts of the world have highlighted the need for devices capable of detecting such dangerous organophosphorus compounds for use by both military and civilian personnel. The need for the reliable determination of these organophosphorus compounds particularly those with cholinesterase inhibiting effects has led to the development of a number of sophisticated methods mostly involving the use of gas and liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Accurate detection and quantification of toxic substances is generally achievable however at relatively high cost and extended response time. Additionally the measurement of nerve agents in mixtures with these traditional methods requires cumbersome extraction and manipulation procedures.

Despite this need the sensitive and chemically specific detection of organophosphorus compounds remains a significant challenge. This is due in part to the extreme toxicity of organophosphorus compounds the median lethal dose for the nerve agent VX is 7 g per kg of body weight for a normal adult requiring sensitivity levels in the range of parts per billion.

Current methods for analyzing organophosphorus compounds having nerve agent activity have been limited particularly with respect to previously unknown organophosphorus nerve agents. Such methods require multi instrumental investigations thus necessitating larger sample amounts and extensive time and effort for reliable implementation. Samples obtained from the environment can contain a range of complex organophosphorus compounds generated from biological and industrial sources. The labile nature of such compounds requires a rapid method of analysis.

It would be useful to have a detection mechanism with features which are applicable to both military and commercial product markets including cost effectiveness high reliability and capability of identifying organophosphorus compounds. Satisfying these demanding requirements necessitates a novel approach to the measurement of low concentrations of organophosphorus compounds including those previously unknown. There is a further need to provide a rapid efficient and highly reliable method of detecting identifying and quantifying known and prospective chemical agent threats specifically organophosphorus based nerve agents and their corresponding degradation products.

The present invention relates generally to a method of determining the presence of organophosphorus compounds in a sample. The method of the present invention provides a rapid and reliable approach for detecting known and previously unknown organophosphorus compounds. The present invention is designed to generate chemical products from a parent compound that are very stable for use as important markers and biomarkers of such compounds which may be represented in the form of unique chemical indicators generated by suitable chemical analyzing means. In particular the method of the present invention involves degrading the organophosphorus compounds using suitable hydrolyzing agents and analyzing the corresponding products through suitable chemical analyzing means for obtaining a unique profile or fingerprint from the corresponding multiple analytes to identify the organophosphorus compounds that may be present.

The present invention utilizes a combination of alkali and chemical specific enzymatic transformations of the organophosphorus compound to generate three distinct phospho analytes. This approach produces a unique profile that allows screening and identification of known and potential nerve agents using currently available chemical analyzing techniques such as for example gas chromatography in combination with a flame photometric detector GC FPD and phosphorous filter gas chromatography in combination with the Pulsed Flame Photometric Detector GC PFPD liquid chromatography mass spectrometry LC MS and the like. The compounds and individual components of these pre instrumentation derived products can be further interrogated by the existing instrumental methods e.g. GC MS GC MS MS for specific identification.

In one aspect of the present invention there is provided a method of determining the presence of a compound of Formula I 

when Ris methyl and X is S 2 diethylaminoethyl then Ris not i butyl in a sample suspected of containing the same the method comprises the steps of 

treating the sample with a first hydrolyzing agent in amounts sufficient to convert the compound of Formula I to a detectable amount of a corresponding compound of Formula II 

treating the sample with a second hydrolyzing agent in amounts sufficient to convert the compound of Formula II to a detectable amount of a corresponding compound of Formula III 

analyzing the sample to determine the presence of the compound of Formula III wherein the presence of the compound of Formula III indicates the presence of the compound of Formula I in the sample.

In another aspect of the present invention there is provided a method of determining the presence of a compound of Formula I 

when Ris methyl and X is S 2 diethylaminoethyl then Ris not i butyl in a sample suspected of containing the same the method comprises the steps of 

analyzing the sample to yield a first chemical indicator corresponding to a specific one of the compound of Formula I 

analyzing the first hydrolyzing agent treated sample to yield a second chemical indicator corresponding to a specific one of the compound of Formula II 

analyzing the second hydrolyzing agent treated sample to yield a third chemical indicator corresponding to a specific one of the compound of Formula III and

evaluating at least one of the first second and third chemical indicators to confirm the presence of the compound of Formula I in the sample.

In a particular aspect of the present invention the first hydrolyzing agent is capable of selectively cleaving the compound of Formula I at the P X bond and the second hydrolyzing agent is capable of selectively cleaving the compound of Formula II at the Rester bond.

The present invention is directed to a method of determining the presence of an organophosphorus compound in a sample suspected of containing the same. The method of the present invention utilizes a first hydrolyzing agent specific to a parent organophosphorus compound for conversion to an intermediate compound and a second hydrolyzing agent specific to the intermediate compound for conversion to a final compound. The detection of the final compound and or the detection of the final compound in combination with the parent and intermediate compounds provide a positive result. In one aspect of the present invention specific enzymes in combination with alkali compounds are utilized to enhance the scope speed and reliability necessary to detect and analyze the presence of organophosphorus compounds including those previously unknown. In particular the method of the present invention utilizes sequential degradation of the compounds and subsequent analysis of the compounds and the corresponding products to generate a specific fingerprint or profile therefrom.

The present invention augments existing chemical warfare agent detection methods and is based on a novel generic method that is predicated by the specificity of organophosphorus hydrolyzing enzymes such as phosphonate ester hydrolase PEH to degrade the phosphonate ester products of the compounds. The method can be used for both initial screening and identification purposes with vastly improved efficiency and reliability. The methods of the present invention would be suitable for many applications both military and civilian. It would be especially well suited for Chemical Weapons Convention CWC verification purposes where the highest degree of reliability is required and both the allotted time and the allocated equipment are very limited. In this regard the proposed method could be applicable for Domestic Preparedness and Homeland Defense Programs as well.

By making use of the specificity of certain organophosphorus hydrolyzing enzymes including phosphonate ester hydrolase PEH alone or optionally in combination with organophosphorus hydrolase OPH and or organophosphorus acid anhydrolase OPAA the present invention is able to facilitate the identification and quantification of both known and unknown organophosphorus compounds based on phosphonate esters and their degradation phospho products.

In one embodiment of the present invention there is provided a method of determining the presence of a compound of Formula I 

when Ris methyl and X is S 2 diethylaminoethyl then Ris not i butyl in a sample suspected of containing the same the method comprises the steps of 

treating the sample with a first hydrolyzing agent in amounts sufficient to convert the compound of Formula I to a corresponding compound of Formula II 

treating the sample with a second hydrolyzing agent in amounts sufficient to convert the compound of Formula II to a corresponding compound of Formula III 

analyzing the sample to determine the presence of the compound of Formula III wherein the presence of the compound of Formula III indicates the presence of the compound of Formula I in the sample.

In another embodiment of the present invention there is provided a method of determining the presence of a compound of Formula I 

when Ris methyl and X is S 2 diethylaminoethyl then Ris not i butyl in a sample suspected of containing the same the method comprises the steps of 

analyzing the sample to yield a first chemical indicator corresponding to a specific one of the compound of Formula I 

analyzing the first hydrolyzing agent treated sample to yield a second chemical indicator corresponding to a specific one of the compound of Formula II 

analyzing the second hydrolyzing agent treated sample to yield a third chemical indicator corresponding to a specific one of the compound of Formula III and

evaluating at least one of the first second and third chemical indicators to confirm the presence of the compound of Formula I in the sample.

As used herein the term organic moiety refers to a range of aliphatic groups including alkyl heteroalkyl heteroalkenyl heteroalkynyl cycloalkyl alkenyl alkynyl haloalkyl alkoxy and the like aromatic groups and heterocyclic groups.

As used herein the term aliphatic refers to a linear branched cyclic alkane alkene or alkyne. Representative aliphatic groups have from 1 to 36 carbon atoms wherein lower aliphatic groups have from about 1 to 12 carbon atoms and higher aliphatic groups have about 10 to about 24 carbon atoms.

As used herein the terms aryl or aromatic refer to an unsaturated cyclic carbon compound with 4n 2 delocalized Tr electrons where n is a non negative integer. Representative aryl groups include from about 5 to 18 aromatic ring atoms and from about 1 to 3 aromatic rings.

As used herein the terms heterocyclic and heteroalicyclic refer to a saturated or unsaturated ring compound having one or more atoms other than carbon in the ring for example nitrogen oxygen or sulfur. Typical heterocyclic groups include heteroaromatic and heteroalicyclic groups that have about a total of 3 to 8 ring atoms and 1 to about 3 fused or separate rings and 1 to about 3 ring heteroatoms such as N O or S atoms.

The method of the present invention is further useful for determining the presence of the compounds of Formula I wherein Ris independently selected from CH CHCH CHCHCH CH CH CHCHCHCH CH CHCH CH CCH CH CH NOCH and CHCH and Ris independently selected from CH CHCH CHCHCH CHCHCHCH CHCHCH CH CHCH CHCHCH CHCH and CHC O . The leaving group X can be selected from any moiety that is energetically labile as an anion or a negatively charged group including but not limited to a halogen a cyamide group and a mercaptan group.

The compounds of Formula I are part of a class of organophosphorus compounds referred to as phosphonates. Phosphonates encompass chemical warfare agents including extremely toxic cholinesterase inhibitors. Each of the compounds possesses a phosphonate ester in the structure wherein Ris bonded to the oxygen atom via a carbon atom and Ris bonded to the phosphor atom via a carbon atom. The phosphor atom of the phosphonate ester is pentavalent which facilitates substitution at three positions R R and X representing a tri substituted compound. The three positions on the phosphor atom can accept a number of possible groups for attachment thereto. This enables large variations of known compounds and previously unknown ones to be generated. Thus the present invention provides a method of detecting identifying and quantifying the presence of chemical warfare agents that contain organophosphorus compounds. The method is useful to detect and analyze not only known organophosphorus compounds but also presently unknown unclassified organophosphorus compounds.

The method of the present invention is useful for detecting the presence of organophosphorus compounds of Formula I including but not limited to dimethyl methylphosphonate dibutyl methylphosphonate diethyl vinylphosphonate diethyl benzylphosphonate diethyl benzoylphosphonate diethyl allylphosphonate diethyl ethylphosphonate dimethyl phenylphosphonate diethyl 4 methylbenzylphosphonate and combinations thereof.

Applicants have observed that by selectively hydrolyzing the compound to yield specific products via a two step process a unique fingerprint or profile of a compound of Formula I can be generated for accurate identification. The products can be detected in the sample using known chemical analysis methods to generate the profile. Referring to Scheme 1 prior to treatment a sample is chemically analyzed to make a preliminary reading to generate a first chemical indicator. The sample is treated with a first hydrolyzing agent to remove the leaving group from the compound of Formula I that may be present. The first hydrolyzing agent may be selected from alkaline compounds such as sodium hydroxide potassium hydroxide and the like and enzymatic agents capable of cleaving the P X bond of the compound of Formula I including phosphoric triester hydrolase enzymes such as organophosphorus hydrolase. This results in a hydrolytic removal of the leaving group X thus yielding a compound of Formula II i.e. Rphosphonate ester a di substituted phosphonate. The treated sample is chemically analyzed to make a reading of the product to generate a second chemical indicator.

Thereafter the sample is treated with a second hydrolyzing agent to hydrolyze the R ester bond of the compound of Formula II to yield a corresponding compound of Formula III i.e. Rphosphonic acid a mono substituted phosphonate. The second hydrolyzing agent may be selected from any enzymatic agent capable of selectively cleaving the R O bond of the compound of Formula II . The treated sample is again chemically analyzed to make a reading to generate a third chemical indicator. The second hydrolyzing agent is selected from enzymes such as phosphonate ester hydrolase to perform enzyme mediated hydrolysis. As described above the differences in the properties of the parent compound and the products can be used to generate a unique profile represented by the generated chemical indicators. For example different volatility characteristics of the indicator compounds I II and III results in the distinct retention indices and provide useful chemical indicators for identifying the parent compound.

The present invention provides a simple method for quickly screening incoming samples for the presence of known organophosphorus compounds such as GB GD GF VX and Russian VX agents as well as previously unknown organophosphorus compounds. Addition of a first hydrolyzing agent selected from an alkaline compound or an enzymatic agent capable of selectively treating the tri substituted compound of Formula I to each sample enables the conversion of the organophosphorus compounds to a di substituted phosphonate ester product i.e. compound of Formula II prior to instrumental analysis. The labile character of the organophosphorus compounds makes it likely that post exposure samples would already contain considerable amounts of the highly stable phosphonate ester degradation products. This approach allows these degradation phosphonate ester products to be readily identifiable and thus provides important biomarkers and markers for both known and previously unknown organophosphorus compounds that are based on phosphonate esters. In addition with all of the embodiments of the present invention it is possible to detect identify and quantify other phosphonate ester degradation products besides methylphosphonate including compounds having for example an alkyl or aryl substitution to the Rgroup in the above described Formula I for example ethylphosphonate or phenylphosphonate .

In the present invention the first hydrolyzing agent may be selected from an alkaline compound such as sodium hydroxide ammonium hydroxide potassium hydroxide alkaline pH buffer and the like and combinations thereof a tri substituted organophosphorus hydrolyzing enzymatic agent capable of selectively hydrolyzing tri substituted organophosphorus compounds i.e. compounds of Formula I particularly at the P X bond such as for example organophosphorus hydrolase organophosphorus acid anhydrolase diisopropyl fluorophosphatase DFPase paraoxonase parathion hydrolase and combinations thereof.

The second hydrolyzing agent may be selected from a di substituted organophosphorus hydrolyzing enzymatic agent capable of selectively hydrolyzing di substituted organophosphorus compounds i.e. compounds of Formula II particularly at the Rester bond.

 a contacting a liquid sample suspected of containing organophosphorus compounds and mixtures thereof with a sufficient amount of a first hydrolyzing agent selected from an alkaline compound such as for example sodium hydroxide potassium hydroxide ammonium hydroxide and the like including a high pH buffer and a specific hydrolyzing enzyme such as for example organophosphorus hydrolase OPH or organophosphorus acid anhydrolase OPM and the like and combinations thereof and time to convert the organophosphorus compound to at least a detectable amount of its corresponding phosphonate ester 

 b neutralizing the sample of step a using known protocols including but not limited to titration with hydrochloric acid and or by adding a buffer to bring the resulting solution to the desired pH 

 c treating the sample of step b with a sufficient amount of an organophosphorus specific hydrolyzing enzyme such as for example phosphonate ester hydrolase PEH and time to convert the phosphonate ester to at least a detectable amount of its corresponding phosphonate and

 d detecting the presence of phosphonate such as methylphosphonate which presence is indicative of organophosphorus compounds. Preferably the degradation product phosphonate may be detected using liquid or gas chromatography mass spectrometry flame photometric detector and phosphorus filter or any combination of these techniques.

Preferably the amount of the first hydrolyzing agent in the form of a tri substituted organophosphorus hydrolyzing enzymatic agent such as organophosphorus hydrolase is at least about 25 DFP units per ml. Preferably the amount of organophosphorus acid anhydrolase used is at least about 25 DFP units per ml. It is noted that one EMPA unit will hydrolyze 1.0 micromole of ethyl methylphosphonate EMPA per minute. Similarly one DFP unit will hydrolyze 1.0 micromole of diisopropyl fluorophosphate DFP per minute.

Preferably the amount of the second hydrolyzing agent in the form of a di substituted organophosphorus hydrolyzing enzymatic agent such as phosphonate ester hydrolase is at least about 0.5 EMPA units per ml. It is noted that one EMPA unit will hydrolyze 1.0 micromole of ethyl methylphosphonate EMPA per minute.

In one particular embodiment of the present invention the method comprises employment of an alkaline compound and PEH. The only enzyme employed in this particular method is PEH. For instance four aliquots of the sample are analyzed as follows one aliquot contains only the untreated sample a second aliquot contains the sample plus alkali so that this sample solution is neutralized e.g. treated with 1 10 volume of 10 N NaOH for 1 hour and neutralized with 1 10 volume of 10 N acid a third aliquot contains only PEH and a fourth aliquot contains a part of the sample contained in the second aliquot following neutralization plus PEH. After allowing sufficient time for the enzymes to hydrolyze all or most of the substrates in a buffered aqueous solution the first aliquot containing only the untreated sample may be analyzed by gas chromatography in two capacities without derivatization and after being derivatized. The other three aliquots may be analyzed by gas chromatography after derivatization and the results are then compared. The peaks from the gas chromatography analysis will indicate additional specificity about the particular nerve agent in the sample.

The present invention contemplates a gas chromatography flame photometric detector mass spectrometry GC FPD MS methodology that would facilitate the reliability and speed for detection identification and quantification of known and unknown organophosphorus compounds with phosphonate ester moieties and their degraded phospho products.

The sample to be tested is preferably in the form of a solution. In one aspect of the present invention the solution is obtained by wiping a suspected surface with a polyester or similar type wipe or cloth and thereafter extracting the materials present on the wipe with a aqueous buffer solution such as 5 mM Bis Tris Propane pH 7.0. Alternatively a soil sample can be eluted to obtain the liquid sample for analysis. A still further aspect includes treating an aliquot of an organic solvent including a sample suspected of containing the organophosphorus compound as an analyte with an alkali for a sufficient time such as for instance about one hour and subsequently evaporating the organic solvent and neutralizing the remaining aqueous solution with an acid to obtain hydrolyzed derivative of the organophosphorus compound as an analyte believed to be therein.

In another embodiment of the invention there is provided kits for detecting the presence of chemical warfare agents that contain organophosphorus compounds precursors of chemical warfare agents and degradation products thereof. One such kit includes packaged in association 

 a phosphonate ester hydrolase preferably at least about 0.5 EMPA units an alkali and a neutralizing agent and

 b a detection device for detecting the presence of the compound of Formula III which presence is indicative of chemical warfare agents that contain organophosphorus compounds. The detection device may be further calibrated to detect the compounds of Formula I and II .

 a phosphonate ester hydrolase preferably at least about 0.5 EMPA units optional organophosphorus hydrolase preferably at least about 25 DFP units and optional organophosphorus acid anhydrolase preferably at least about 25 DFP units and

 b a detection device for detecting the presence of the compound of Formula III which presence is indicative of chemical warfare agents that contain organophosphorus compounds. The detection device may be further calibrated to detect the compounds of Formula I and II .

Advantages of these kits and indeed all of the embodiments of the present invention are its tremendous reliability utilizing the specificity of these enzymes.

When desirable a chromogenic detector reagent may be used with the compositions methods of detection and kits of the present invention.

The PEH enzymes may be obtained from such as strain PG2982. Bacteria cells PG2982 were deposited on Mar. 5 2002 with the ATCC P.O. Box 1549 Manassas Va. 20108 under Accession No. PTA 4116. The PEH enzymes may be produced and purified using well established methods e.g. gel filtration ion exchange hydroxyapatite and hydrophobic interaction chromatographies . Further details on the producing PEH can be found in U.S. Pat. No. 6 838 277 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference. Substrate specificities for the purified PEH may be ascertained using techniques known in the art for selected alkyl alkyl alkyl aryl aryl alkyl and aryl aryl phosphonate esters and pesticide degradation products. The reaction rate kinetics and the optimal reaction conditions may also be ascertained using techniques known in the art. For routine kinetics GC FPD may be used for the agents and silylated derivatives of the analytes. The enzymes may be produced purified freeze dried immobilized and encapsulated or otherwise stabilized. GC FPD MS may be used for database and agent identification.

Two different assay methods may be used for monitoring PEH activity. For screening large numbers of samples e.g. chromatographic effluents chromogenic substrate may be used in calorimetric assays. Samples showing activity for the chromogenic substrate may be evaluated further with selected hydrolyzed agent substrates using GC FPD for silylated derivatives of the analytes. GC FPD analysis may also be used to study the enzymatic hydrolysis of agents. For VX and R VX degradation studies in addition to the GC FPD analysis Ellman s reagent DTNB calorimetric method may be used.

Methods for obtaining OPH are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 589 386 the content of which is incorporated herein by reference. Methods for obtaining OPAA are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5 928 927 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 080 566 each of which is incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention also contemplates an analytical database cataloguing known and previously unknown organophosphorus compounds and their products including phosphonates and phosphonate esters. For instance a modest database consisting of approximately 25 60 compounds may be created without great expense and effort.

A culture of PG2982 was grown in modified MOPS minimal media. The modified MOPS minimal media was formulated to contain 7.0 g MOPS morpholinopropanesulfonic acid 2.4 g NaCl 0.6 g Tricine 0.43 g NHCl 85 mg MgCl.6HO 40 g KSO 8.3 mg Thiamine 1.9 mg FeSO.HO 1.67 ml Salts 6.0 g MgCO.7HO 3.0 g nitrilotriacetic acid 1.0 g NaCl 1.0 g MnSO.HO 0.5 g FeSO.7HO 0.1 g CaCl2HO 0.1 g CoCl.6HO 0.1 g ZnSO.7HO 20 mg HBO 10 mg NaMoO.2HO 10 mg CuSOper liter 4.2 ml 20 glucose 2.3 ml 40 sodium citrate 2.3 ml 40 potassium gluconate with final pH adjusted to 7.4 with KOH plus 0.3 mM final concentration of methyl methylphosphonate obtained from dimethyl methylphosphonate through alkali hydrolysis and subsequent titration to neutral pH used as the sole phosphorous source.

A nutrient agar plate was streaked with and incubated at about 30 C. for about 16 24 hours. A single colony was selected for initiating a seed culture in modified MOPS minimal media and grown for about 24 hours at about 30 C. using a shaking incubator set at 200 rpm. 8.3 ml of the seed culture O.D. 600 nm 1.6 was used to initiate 2.4 L cultures in 6 L flasks and incubated for about 48 hours. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at about 6174 g 4 C. for about 15 minutes. The cells were washed with 15 ml 0.2 M NaCl per 400 ml initial culture and pelleted at 17 640 g. Pellets were frozen at 80 C. prior to resuspension in 100 mM Tris Cl pH 8.0 100 mM KCl 2 mM DTT and lysed using a French press with a 1 diameter pressure cell three times at pressures greater than 16 000 psi. Cell debris was pelleted at 24 000 g at 4 C. for about 30 minutes. The resulting crude extract was stored at about 80 C. The chromogenic substrate p nitrophenyl phenyl phosphonate was used to assay for phosphonate ester hydrolase activity during purification. Unless otherwise noted all chemicals were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis Mo. .

The PEH extract in the amount of 2 10 l was mixed with an assay mix 2 mM p nitrophenyl phenyl phosphonate 20 mM bis tris propane pH 8.5 0.5 mM MnCl to a total volume of 1 ml. Absorbance was monitored at 405 nm at 30 second intervals at about 22 C. for about 4 minutes using a Beckman Du 640 spectrometer. A molar extinction coefficient of about 1.74 10was determined for the p nitrophenol product.

It is noted that all purification steps were performed at 0 4 C. and all solutions used were ice cold.

The crude extract was diluted with 2 mM DTT in a ratio amount of 1 3. The mixture was loaded onto a DEAE Sepharose FF Pharmacia 2.5 15 cm column equilibrated with 20 mM Tris Cl pH 8.0 2 mM DTT. The column washed with 225 ml 20 mM Tris Cl pH 8.0 2 mM DTT followed by 280 ml 100 mM KCl 100 mM Tris Cl pH 8.0 2 mM DTT. PEH was eluted with 200 ml 270 mM KCl 100 mM Tris Cl pH 8.0 100 mM KCl 2 mM DTT collected in 20 ml fractions.

The active fractions from the DEAE step gradient were pooled and precipitated with NH SO80 saturation. The precipitated protein was collected by centrifugation at 25 000 g for about 30 minutes and the pellet was resuspended in a minimal volume of 100 mM KCl 100 mM Tris Cl pH 8.0 2 mM DTT and frozen at about 80 C. until use.

Samples of nerve agents consisting of GB sarin GD soman GF cyclosarin VX and Russian VX in the amount of about 2 g were alkali hydrolyzed with 40 ml 1.0 N NaOH at about 22 C. for seven days after which the solutions were titrated to neutral pH with HCl the concentration adjusted to 28.5 mM with deionized water and subsequently sterilized by filtration through 0.2 micron filter. The hydrolysis of nine commercially obtained dialkyl alkylphosphonates including dimethyl methylphosphonate dibutyl methylphosphonate diethyl vinylphosphonate diethyl benzylphosphonate diethyl benzylphosphonate diethyl benzoylphosphonate diethyl allylphosphonate diethyl ethylphosphonate dimethyl phenylphosphonate and diethyl 4 methylbenzylphosphonate were conducted similarly.

The hydrolyzed nerve agents and hydrolyzed dialkyl alkylphosphonates were tested for their ability to be degraded by the ammonium sulfate precipitated partially purified PEH extract. For each hydrolyzed nerve agent a 60 l reaction mixture containing 50 mM BTP pH 9.0 1 mM MnCl 10 mM hydrolyzed nerve agent or hydrolyzed dialkyl alkylphosphonates was prepared and mixed with 2 l of PEH extract. The mixture was incubated at about 30 C. At predetermined time intervals a 10 l aliquot was drawn from the reaction mixture and added to 150 l methanol to quench the reaction. The mixture was dried in Speedvac Saveant Albertville Minn. and derivatized with 50 l N O bis trimethylsilyl trifluoroacetamide with 1 trimethylchlorosilane BSTFA TMS Pierce Rockford Ill. at 10 C. for about 20 minutes. After derivatization 150 l acetonitrile was added to the sample vortexed and transferred to microvial inserts. 1 l of the sample was drawn for analysis of the organophosphorus compounds using an Agilent 6890 GC FPD apparatus equipped with an autoinjector and a phosphorous filter on ZB 5 column 30 m 0.32 ID 0.25 m filament thickness Zebron Torrance Calif. . Helium was used as the carrier gas. The GC FPD apparatus was set with a front inlet pressure of about 8.93 psi inlet temperature of about 250 C. initial oven temperature of 100 C. ramped to 130 C. at a rate of 10 C. min then to 280 C. at a rate of 15 C. min and maintained at 280 C. for 3 minutes.

A series of phosphonate ester compounds were obtained from Queens College of CUNY in New York for this experiment. Although the supplier indicated the samples to be pure based on their results of 31P nuclear magnetic resonance analysis our examination on GC FPD and on HPLC with Dionex ED50 conductivity detector Sunnyvale Calif. showed the presence of several compounds in some of the samples.

The nerve agent test samples were treated with alkaline compounds followed by degradation with PEH as shown in Table 1. All the nerve agent alkaline hydrolyzed compounds h Agents were degraded to methylphosphonic acid MPA retention time 4.39 minutes . Gas chromatography in combination with a flame photometric detector equipped with a phosphorous filter was used for analyzing the progress of the hydrolysis reactions. Analysis was made of the samples at times 0 h h 1 h 3 h and 19 h and analysis of the control was also made.

Gas chromatography and a flame photometric detector having a phosphorous filter were used to analyze the dialkyl alkylphosphonate compounds and their trimethyl silylated TMS products. Each step of the alkali hydrolysis and subsequent enzymatic degradation was monitored by GC FPD. All the alkali hydrolyzed compounds were transformed to alkylphosphonic acid. By hydrolyzing each nerve agent and the dialkyl alkylphosphonate compounds to their intermediates and final products two additional analytes are now available for analysis. Moreover the second degradation step allows for increased confidence predicated by the specificity of enzymatic degradation.

Gas chromatography and a flame photometric detector having a phosphorous filter were used to analyze the synthetic alkyl alkylphosphonate compounds and their trimethyl silylated TMS products. Using the present invention Applicants were able to develop a retention time database for the silylated alkyl alkylphosphonates and their products via use of GC FPD as shown in Table 2. The primary advantage of this methodology is the potential to detect novel threat agents due to the specificity of the hydrolyzing enzyme to phosphonate compounds. The retention times t of the compounds and their degradation products are listed in Table 2.

The hydrolysis of the compounds to their intermediates and products makes available 3 analytes per agent for interrogation. In addition the PEH degradation step enhances the confidence predicated by the specificity of enzymatic degradation and the distinctiveness of the retention indices. Using this method allows a retention time database to be generated for the agent and its silylated products for future identification reference as shown in Table 1.

The method of the present invention is especially suited for detecting previously unknown threat agents composed of organophosphorus compounds. Alkaline hydrolysis is believed to exhibit reactivity over a wider range of organophosphorus compounds than current organophosphorus hydrolyzing enzymes. Thus it is important to demonstrate the ability of alkaline compounds to hydrolyze a range of organophosphorus compounds to the corresponding phosphonate esters.

In addition to the five known nerve agents nine commercially available dialkyl alkylphosphonates including dimethyl methylphosphonate dibutyl methylphosphonate diethyl vinylphosphonate diethyl benzylphosphonate diethyl benzoylphosphonate diethyl allylphosphonate diethyl ethylphosphonate dimethyl phenylphosphonate and diethyl 4 methylbenzylphosphonate were converted to their corresponding monoalkyl alkylphosphonates via alkali hydrolysis treatment. These dialkyl alkylphosphonates exhibit substantially stronger ester bonds than the leaving groups of the five known nerve agents and those that are anticipated in prospective nerve agents since the toxicity is contingent on the ease of removal of the leaving group. This demonstrates the ability of the alkaline compounds to effectively hydrolyze both current and potential organophosphorus compounds into phosphonate esters.

A second consideration of the methods of the present invention is the ability of PEH to hydrolize a broad range of phosphonate esters. PEH was tested for its ability to degrade broad range of alkyl and aryl esters of phosphonates. Applicants have found that in addition to alkali treated products of GB GD GF VX and Russian VX nerve agents PEH effectively degraded all of the phosphonate esters tested. All 26 synthetic phosphonate esters listed in Table 2 were degraded by PEH. It is noted that the discrepancies of retention time values between Table 1 and Table 2 are due to a slight difference in the lengths of GC columns that were used in different experiments.

Applicants have further observed that although PEH effectively degraded alkali treated products of compounds of Formula I and GB GD GF VX and Russian VX nerve agents but not the products of similarly treated diisopropyl fluorophosphate DFP and three organophosphorus pesticides tested Malathion Monocrotophos and Diazinon. This demonstrated that the PEH enzyme exhibits selective degradation of phosphonate ester bonds that are present in compounds of Formula I and the chemical nerve agents while remaining ineffective against 1 and 2 carbon alkyl ester bonds of phosphates diisopropyl phosphate and thiophosphates that are commonly found in pesticides. This demonstrates that PEH can hydrolyze a broad range of organophosphorus compounds of chemical warfare for enabling identification including previously unknown compounds in the present invention while excluding environmental contaminants including pesticides to avoid false positives.

The present invention facilitates screening for novel variants of known chemical warfare agents including GB GD GF VX and Russian VX nerve agents in a dependable rapid and accurate manner. For example an organophosphorus nerve agent simulant dimethyl methylphosphonate was tested using the method of the present invention. Alkali treatment degrades dimethyl methylphosphonate t 2.92 min to methyl methylphosphonate ester t 3.70 as measured by GC FPD. The ester was subsequently degraded to methyl phosphonic acid t 4.72 min by PEH. The corresponding shift in retention times provides good chemical indicators and enhances greater confidence in the identification peaks of interest. The use of alkali degradation treatment is routinely employed for the analysis of known nerve agents. The introduction of the additional PEH treatment as envisioned in this invention provides a quick screening tool to identify potential nerve agent or its product from other possible phospho product contaminants present in the sample for a more detailed analysis using for example GC MS MS. The use of the chemical indicators in the form of specific retention time t values associated with each treatment step i.e. alkali treatment and PEH treatment and a database of retention time values for various organophosphorus compounds and their products provides the capability to identify compounds of interest with high degree of reliability.

In addition to providing a suitable database screening process the present invention provides ease in identifying crucial identification peaks in complex matrices. The use of GC FPD with a phosphorous filter enables very low detection limits for phosphorous compounds while greatly reducing background noise thereby allowing focus on specific phosphorous compounds. The use of the chemical indicators in the form of specific retention time t values associated with each treatment step i.e. alkali treatment and PEH treatment and a database of retention time values for various organophosphorus compounds and their products provides the capability to presumptively identify individual compounds of interest without further instrumental analysis. Subsequent instrumental analysis would only be used for confirmation purposes. Some of the synthetic phosphonate esters were contaminated with unknown phosphorous compounds. The present invention allowed easy identification of the synthetic phosphonate ester peak by the corresponding shifts during PEH enzyme treatment. Individual phosphonate esters were presumptively identified using the specific retention time values before and after treatments. The identities of synthetic phosphonate esters were confirmed by GC MS. It should be noted that if PEH treatment of a chemical results in the retention time change on GC FPD after silylation the unknown chemical can be presumptively identified as a phosphonate ester compound even in the absence of the database parameters database is needed only for presumptive identification of the individual phosphonate ester.

The forgoing discussion discloses and describes merely exemplary embodiments of the present invention. One skilled in the art will readily recognize from such discussion and from the accompanying claims that various changes modifications and variations can be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention as defined in the following claims.

