---

title: Reefing assembly for a circular parachute
abstract: A reefing assembly for a circular parachute having a canopy including a skirt portion, and suspension lines attached to the skirt portion. The assembly includes a tension structure bounding a central opening and having a plurality of straight segments. A plurality of cords, each cord having two ends, are each fixed to one end of one of the tension structure straight segments to define a loop, and a plurality of rings slidably disposed on each of the loops. Each of the rings is slidably connected to at least one of the suspension lines. The rings are clustered together at a central portion of their respective loops, and upon deployment of the canopy, slide along their respective loops to become substantially equidistantly disposed on their respective loops. The assembly facilitates a restrained opening of the canopy and thereby reduces opening shock load.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07293742&OS=07293742&RS=07293742
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07293742
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050413
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by the U.S. Government for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalty thereon.

The invention relates to parachutes and is directed more particularly to a reefing assembly for use in conjunction with a circular parachute to reduce parachute opening shock load.

Parachutes are often used to deliver cargo to remote and inaccessible rough terrain areas. They are also used to resupply military units on land and at sea. Deployment of parachutes usually occurs after a cargo aircraft reduces its speed from its cruise velocity to some lower velocity at low altitude to allow deployed cargo parachutes to survive shock loads generated during the parachute opening phase of the airdrop. High altitude deployment of cargo parachute systems is especially difficult because of the low density high altitude effect on airspeed of the aircraft. For example an aircraft at an altitude of 25 000 ft. under standard atmospheric conditions having an indicated airspeed of 130 knots is actually at a true airspeed of about 240 knots. Parachute opening forces increase with increased dynamic pressure and dynamic pressure increases directly with the square of the aircraft true airspeed.

High dynamic pressures force a parachute to open very quickly reducing opening time to fractions of a second. This situation can cause explosive damaging and catastrophic openings. To prevent such events from happening during the deployment and opening phase of a parachute methods to slow the opening have been devised. The methods are typically referred to as reefing . Reefing techniques usually involve restricting the initial diameter of the parachute canopy at it s skirt where the suspension lines attach to the canopy. This is accomplished by skirt reefing or line reefing.

Skirt reefing employs a cord which is passed through rings attached to the parachute skirt at each suspension line towards the inside of the canopy. The cord length is pre determined depending on the degree of reefing required. A pyrotechnic device with a time delay is activated upon deployment from the aircraft. The device is used to provide a length of time in which the canopy is reefed and then activate a blade to cut the reefing line at the skirt allowing the parachute to fully open or open to a second stage of reefing.

Line reefing forces the suspension lines to remain together in a bundle at a predetermined distance from the parachute skirt thereby controlling the initial diameter of the parachute. Again a time delayed pyrotechnic device is used to determine reefing time and to effect cutting of a retaining line to allow release of the suspension lines. A second method of line reefing makes use of the dynamic pressure exerted on a sail positioned at the middle of all the suspension line groups and attached to each suspension line group by a ring through which each line group passes. During the opening of the parachute the pressure on the sail forces the suspension line groups closer together while the canopy begins to open and the entire canopy payload system slows down. As the canopy inflates and spreads the sail is forced to slide down the suspension line groups allowing the canopy to continue to fully open.

With both types of reefing methods when disreefing begins inflation accelerates and high forces are exhibited upon the full open canopy with over inflation often occurring. Further both types rely upon the proper functioning of a time delayed pyrotechnic activated cutter device to cut reefing lines at pre set times. Such devices add expense and weight to a parachute pack and necessarily include an explosive a timer and a sharp instrument.

There is a need for a reefing assembly for parachutes which reduces the shock load produced by rapid opening of the parachutes and which does not require the use of a timed pyrotechnic device nor a cutter device activated thereby for physically severing one or more reef lines.

An object of the invention is therefore to provide a reefing system which does not rely upon a pyrotechnic device operated at a pre set time to cause cutter blades to sever reef lines.

With the above and other objects in view a feature of the invention is the provision of a reefing assembly for a circular parachute having a canopy a skirt portion thereof and suspension lines attached at first ends thereof to the skirt portion. The reefing assembly includes a central tension structure defined by a plurality of substantially straight webbing or tape segments viewed in plan with the canopy open. A plurality of cords are provided each cord defining a loop having two ends each end of a loop being fixed to one end of one of the tension structure straight segments. A plurality of rings are slidably disposed on each of the loops each of the rings being slidably connected to at least one of the suspension lines with equal numbers of the rings being disposed on each of the loops. The rings are adapted for disposition clustered together at a central portion of their respective loops and adapted upon deployment of the canopy to slide along their respective loops to become substantially equidistantly disposed on their respective loops. The reefing assembly facilitates a restrained opening of the canopy thereby to reduce opening shock load.

The above and other features of the invention including various novel details of construction and combinations of parts will now be more particularly described with reference to the accompanying drawings and pointed out in the claims. It will be understood that the particular assembly embodying the invention is shown by way of illustration only and not as a limitation of the invention. The principles and features of this invention may be employed in various and numerous embodiments without departing from the scope of the invention.

Referring to it will be seen that an illustrative reefing assembly includes a high strength narrow webbing or tape forming a central tension structure bounding a central opening . Attached at corners of the structure are high strength cords and forming continuous loops and with each segment of the tension structure . The number of segments of the tension structure usually is equal to the number of suspension line groups or risers in the parachute system.

In the parachute is provided with four line groups and . Therefore there are four cord loops and formed with the tension structure . is a view looking into the mouth of the parachute canopy as it is opening in a first phase of reefing with the reefing assembly.

High strength cord loops have ring sets mounted on them. All of the ring sets are allowed to slide along cord loops and there is a ring set for each suspension line . Each suspension line passes through its corresponding ring on the ring set .

In canopy gore groups and are line reefed due to their suspension lines passing through their corresponding ring sets . Gores form the initial circumferential skirt opening for inflation of the parachute. This restriction of the gores slows the opening of the parachute.

As inflation proceeds the reefing assembly made up of tension structure cords and ring sets is forced to slide down the parachute suspension lines toward a payload . Because of the deceleration of the payload by the inflating canopy forces increase in the suspension lines and the canopy gore groups begin to spread circumferentially and radially at an accelerated rate. To control the accelerated rate of opening and prevent damage to the parachute the high strength cords continuously change their shape due to the outward radial force produced by the suspension lines as they slide through ring sets and rings sets slide along the high strength cords repositioning themselves.

This action reduces a radial distance R shown in . The reduction of this radial distance causes the continuous reefing device to produce an inward radial force opposing the forces which are accelerating the opening of the parachute. This process continues during the parachute opening phase slowing the parachute opening reducing the opening force on the parachute and payload to a safe and manageable level until the parachute has completely opened.

Referring to it will be seen that the configuration of a reefing device having six suspension line groups includes the tension structure having six segments six cords and and a corresponding number of high strength cord loops and . Gores and make up the parachute skirt initial inflated circumference while gores and are line reefed by their suspension lines and corresponding ring sets as configured and shown in .

Larger parachutes with numerically larger numbers of suspension line groups are reefed in similar fashion.

When parachute opening times require an increase due to increased payload weight high deployment velocity high altitude or combinations of such conditions a sail may be added to the reefing assembly as shown in . Sail increases resistance by increasing aerodynamic drag thereby slowing the decent of the reefing assembly along the suspension lines through ring sets consequently increasing the time required to open the parachute and reducing the opening force. Sail may be fabricated from solid material for high drag or porous material or netting for lower drag depending upon requirements. Cords provide a means for attachment of sail to the reefing assembly.

Interference between the parachute skirt and rings could cause damage at the suspension line attachment points . To prevent this a middle suspension line of each suspension line group is provided with a guide line attached thereto at a selected distance D below the parachute skirt in a fashion so as to stop ring set on the middle suspension line from coming into contact with the parachute skirt and suspension line attachment point .

Guide line runs alongside suspension line and is again attached thereto at some distance D above a suspension line group link or is attached directly to the suspension line group link . Guide line allows ring on the middle suspension line to travel along line but restrains it and all other ring sets on the cord of that suspension line group from damaging the suspension line attachment points and parachute skirt . Each middle suspension line of each suspension line group is provided with a guideline configuration. Guide line attachment point distance D can be varied thereby controlling the initial reefing ratio of the parachute using the reefing assembly described hereinabove.

There is thus provided a reefing assembly which facilitates the restrained opening of a parachute and thereby reduced opening shock without the use of a pyrotechnic device and cutter blade subject to pre set actuation times.

It will be understood that many additional changes in the details materials steps and arrangement of parts which have been herein described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principles and scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims.

