---

title: Integrated code generation for adapter-specific property template
abstract: A computer implemented method, data processing system, and computer usable code are provided for integrated code generation. The aspects of the present invention load properties associated with a saved template. Properties associated with a saved template are processed by replacing the properties with integrated code from an integrated code content template. In response to all of the properties being processed, the integrated code is saved to an integrated code file.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07882489&OS=07882489&RS=07882489
owner: International Business Machines Corporation
number: 07882489
owner_city: Armonk
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051122
---
The present invention relates generally to code generation. More particularly the present invention relates to integrated code generation for adapter specific property templates.

Business integration products optimize operations by integrating and automating business processes. WebSphere Business Integration products help clients to interconnect their islands of information and make full use of the message based architecture. WebSphere Business Integration products are available from International Business Machines Corporation.

Historically isolated applications were written to solve specific problems. There was little vision at the time of an application landscape that would cover the whole range of business requirements so the need for an integrated architecture was not apparent. As a result solutions evolved on a variety of platforms. If and where integration was needed it was usually achieved by hosting the applications on the same system and sharing files. This was no great restriction since most applications back then were batch oriented and large central computers were the accepted technology standard.

When online processing became possible businesses found it more acceptable from a risk and system capacity perspective to just collect data during the day and do the actual processing during nightly batch runs. This mode of operation is still quite prevalent in businesses today.

With the evolution of database management systems the models surrounding the sharing of information began a trend towards integrating information across systems via database federation transformation and replication technologies. The models required the systems sharing information to share the physical data models processing rules and constraints. This sharing resulted in tight coupling between applications. Still in the real world of Information Technology which includes legacy technology and closed systems. Many cases are present in which this is the only feasible style of integration and in those cases it provides good service. Incidentally this integration approach coincided with two tier client server architectures and continues to be in use.

Integration at a fundamental level is about making sure information from different business applications can be shared and used across and beyond the enterprise in a reliable and secure manner through application connectivity. With the evolution of distributed object and message oriented middleware technologies it is now possible to integrate isolated applications running on heterogeneous platforms. This approach allows legacy applications to be connected together with minimal changes needed in existing code. Applications continue to use their own data formats while an integration broker provides the necessary mapping augmentation and distribution of data at runtime. Message oriented middleware allows event based loose coupling between the connected applications and offers increased reliability and flexibility.

Process integration is at the highest level of business integration. Process integration implies coordinating and controlling activities that may span multiple systems and involve people in a variety of roles. Process integration structures implements automates and manages business processes while providing runtime measurements that will then assist in optimizing the process models. Process integration can support long running transactions and roles based human activities. The flow of a business event through the process can be modified by external input either by parameters provided when the process is instantiated or by information retrieved from external data sources such as an application database or by human decisions such as in an approval step.

Process integration can also be seen as the business logic layer that determines what needs to be done at a given point in a process as opposed to how it gets done which is typically the role of the application. Separating the what from the how allows flexibility since one can be changed without affecting the other.

WebSphere Business Integration adapters enable data to move between an application a technology or a packaged legacy system and the underlying transport infrastructure. These adapters access transform and route data through the integration brokers.

Application adapters allow interactions with specific applications and are intermediaries between collaborations or message flows and applications. These adapters transform data from the application into business objects that can be manipulated by the collaborations and message flows and transform business objects from the collaborations and message flows into data that can be received by the specific application.

Technology adapters allow interactions that conform to specific technology standards. For example the extensible markup language XML connector can be used for sending data from WebSphere InterChange Server collaborations to a Web server even if that Web server resides beyond a firewall on a network that is not running the connector agent or other IBM WebSphere software. Extensible markup language XML Java database connectivity JDBC Java text JTEXT and Java message service JMS adapters are examples of technology adapters.

Mainframe adapters allow interactions with legacy applications running on mainframes such as the CICS adapter.

E business adapters provide proven solutions for securely connecting over the firewall to clients desktops to trading partners internal applications and to online marketplaces and exchanges for example the E Mail adapter.

WebSphere Business Integration Adapters are built using a common customizable Java based framework and can be deployed on a variety of platforms. However when adapter developers are developing their adapters for WebSphere Business Integration the developers must read the Connector Development Guide for Java use Connector Configurator to create their adapter specific property template and program adapter code for the adapter specific property template. Programming adapter code for the adapter specific property template is difficult time consuming and susceptible to mistakes.

The different aspects of the present invention provide a computer implemented method data processing system and computer usable code for integrated code generation. Properties associated with a saved template are loaded. Then the properties associated with a saved template are processed by replacing the properties with integrated code from an integrated code content template. The replaced integrated code is saved to an integrated code file in response to all of the properties being processed.

The present invention provides integrated code generation for adapter specific property. With reference now to the figures and in particular with reference to exemplary diagrams of data processing environments are provided in which embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. It should be appreciated that are only exemplary and are not intended to assert or imply any limitation with regard to the environments in which aspects or embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. Many modifications to the depicted environments may be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention.

With reference now to the figures depicts a pictorial representation of a network of data processing systems in which aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Network data processing system is a network of computers in which embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. Network data processing system contains network which is the medium used to provide communications links between various devices and computers connected together within network data processing system . Network may include connections such as wire wireless communication links or fiber optic cables.

In the depicted example server and server connect to network along with storage unit . In addition clients and connect to network . These clients and may be for example personal computers or network computers. In the depicted example server provides data such as boot files operating system images and applications to clients and . Clients and are clients to server in this example. Network data processing system may include additional servers clients and other devices not shown.

In the depicted example network data processing system is the Internet with network representing a worldwide collection of networks and gateways that use the Transmission Control Protocol Internet Protocol TCP IP suite of protocols to communicate with one another. At the heart of the Internet is a backbone of high speed data communication lines between major nodes or host computers consisting of thousands of commercial governmental educational and other computer systems that route data and messages. Of course network data processing system also may be implemented as a number of different types of networks such as for example an intranet a local area network LAN or a wide area network WAN . is intended as an example and not as an architectural limitation for different embodiments of the present invention.

With reference now to a block diagram of a data processing system is shown in which aspects of the present invention may be implemented. Data processing system is an example of a computer such as server or client in in which computer usable code or instructions implementing the processes for embodiments of the present invention may be located.

In the depicted example data processing system employs a hub architecture including north bridge and memory controller hub NB MCH and south bridge and input output I O controller hub SB ICH . Processing unit main memory and graphics processor are connected to NB MCH . Graphics processor may be connected to NB MCH through an accelerated graphics port AGP .

In the depicted example local area network LAN adapter connects to SB ICH . Audio adapter keyboard and mouse adapter modem read only memory ROM hard disk drive HDD CD ROM drive universal serial bus USB ports and other communication ports and PCI PCIe devices connect to SB ICH through bus and bus . PCI PCIe devices may include for example Ethernet adapters add in cards and PC cards for notebook computers. PCI uses a card bus controller while PCIe does not. ROM may be for example a flash binary input output system BIOS .

HDD and CD ROM drive connect to SB ICH through bus . HDD and CD ROM drive may use for example an integrated drive electronics IDE or serial advanced technology attachment SATA interface. Super I O SIO device may be connected to SB ICH .

An operating system runs on processing unit and coordinates and provides control of various components within data processing system in . As a client the operating system may be a commercially available operating system such as Microsoft Windows XP Microsoft and Windows are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States other countries or both . An object oriented programming system such as the Java programming system may run in conjunction with the operating system and provides calls to the operating system from Java programs or applications executing on data processing system Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems Inc. in the United States other countries or both .

As a server data processing system may be for example an IBM eServer pSeries computer system running the Advanced Interactive Executive AIX operating system or the LINUX operating system eServer pSeries and AIX are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the United States other countries or both while LINUX is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States other countries or both . Data processing system may be a symmetric multiprocessor SMP system including a plurality of processors in processing unit . Alternatively a single processor system may be employed.

Instructions for the operating system the object oriented programming system and applications or programs are located on storage devices such as HDD and may be loaded into main memory for execution by processing unit . The processes for embodiments of the present invention are performed by processing unit using computer usable program code which may be located in a memory such as for example main memory ROM or in one or more peripheral devices and .

Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the hardware in may vary depending on the implementation. Other internal hardware or peripheral devices such as flash memory equivalent non volatile memory or optical disk drives and the like may be used in addition to or in place of the hardware depicted in . Also the processes of the present invention may be applied to a multiprocessor data processing system.

In some illustrative examples data processing system may be a personal digital assistant PDA which is configured with flash memory to provide non volatile memory for storing operating system files and or user generated data.

A bus system may be comprised of one or more buses such as bus or bus as shown in . Of course the bus system may be implemented using any type of communication fabric or architecture that provides for a transfer of data between different components or devices attached to the fabric or architecture. A communication unit may include one or more devices used to transmit and receive data such as modem or network adapter of . A memory may be for example main memory ROM or a cache such as found in NB MCH in . The depicted examples in and above described examples are not meant to imply architectural limitations. For example data processing system also may be a tablet computer laptop computer or telephone device in addition to taking the form of a PDA.

The aspects of the present invention provide integrated code generation for adapter specific property. When adapter developers create or modify their adapter specific property templates aspects of the present invention generate adapter specific property Java code based upon the saved template. The aspects of the present invention easily and quickly generate the correct Java code for adapter specific property template. Other aspects of the present invention provide for in place adapter code generation for existing adapter specific property template code. When adapter developers develop their adapter specific integrated code the developers may add adapter specific property template Java code at any place and any time in their Java code by using the described methodology.

Adapter specific properties and generated Java code for the adapter specific properties are part of an application specific component in WebSphere Business Integration Adapter. WebSphere Business Integration Adapter is a composite of Adapter Framework and Application specific component.

WebSphere Business Integration Adapter consists of a collection of software application programming interfaces and tools that enable applications to exchange business data though an integration broker. Each business application requires its own application specific adapter to participate in the business integration process.

If one application such as Systems Applications and Products in Data Processing SAP intends to communicate to another application such as Oracle through WebSphere Business Integration System the need is present to convert the application specific business objects into generic business objects that WebSphere Business Integration System understands. SAP is a vast suite of software that helps business managers implement Enterprise Resource Planning ERP which is a business management system that integrates all facets of the business including planning manufacturing sales and marketing. Additionally the need is present to convert the generic business objects back into application specific business objects these conversions are performed by WebSphere Business Integration Maps.

Adapter Framework provides the generic functionalities to communicate with WebSphere integration brokers. Application specific components contain code that application developers write to specify the actions of the application specific tasks of the adapter. Application specific tasks are tasks such as basic initialization setup methods business object handling and event notification.

Turning now to a functional block diagram of the components used to generate adapter specific integrated code for adapter specific property templates is depicted in accordance with an illustrative embodiment of the present invention. Adapter specific integrated code generation uses template graphical user interface GUI editor template metadata reader writer template metadata code generator and in place template code generator . Template GUI editor is a graphic tool to allow adapter developers to create or modify adapter specific property templates. Template GUI editor is software that may be stored in main memory and displayed using graphics processor of .

Template metadata reader writer allows template GUI editor to read data from or write data to template metadata storage . Template metadata code generator generates adapter specific property Java code when template metadata is created or modified by a user through template GUI editor . In place template code generator inserts adapter specific property template Java code at any place and at any time when adapter developers program adapter specific integrated code. In place template code generator also provides Java language validation to make sure any generated adapter specific integrated code is correct.

The template GUI editor is software that may be stored in main memory and displayed using graphics processor of . The user makes modifications or additions to the displayed template using the template GUI editor step . Then a determination is made as to whether any additional modifications or additions are to be made to the new or modified template step . The determination may be through the user closing the template GUI editor and being prompted to save any changes or through the user saving all data and closing the template GUI editor resulting in a saved template.

Once the user indicates that no more additions or modifications are required the template GUI editor notifies a template metadata code generator such as template metadata code generator of to generate adapter specific property Java code step with the operation ending thereafter.

A pre defined adapter specific property Java code content template is loaded which is designed for adapter implementation step . The Java code content template also considered integrated code content template contains all support import libraries necessary for the integrated code generation. For each adapter specific property the code content generator replaces the properties from the Java code content template step . The integrated code generator then determines if all the properties have been replaced step . If properties remain to be replaced the integrated code generator returns to step . When all the properties are processed the integrated code generator saves the adapter content into the previously created Java file creating an adapter specific integrated code file step . As a last step of the operation the integrated code generator launches a compiler to build the Java file step .

Thus aspects of the present invention provide integrated code generation for adapter specific property templates. When adapter developers create or modify adapter specific property templates using the described tools adapter specific property adapter specific code is generated based upon the saved template. Adapter developers are also provided with modification tools that allow for adapter specific property template Java code to be added at any place and any time in their Java code.

The invention can take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment containing both hardware and software elements. In a preferred embodiment the invention is implemented in software which includes but is not limited to firmware resident software microcode etc.

Furthermore the invention can take the form of a computer program product accessible from a computer usable or computer readable medium providing program code for use by or in connection with a computer or any instruction execution system. For the purposes of this description a computer usable or computer readable medium can be any tangible apparatus that can contain store communicate propagate or transport the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device.

The medium can be an electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system or apparatus or device or a propagation medium. Examples of a computer readable medium include a semiconductor or solid state memory magnetic tape a removable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM a rigid magnetic disk and an optical disk. Current examples of optical disks include compact disk read only memory CD ROM compact disk read write CD R W and DVD.

A data processing system suitable for storing and or executing program code will include at least one processor coupled directly or indirectly to memory elements through a system bus. The memory elements can include local memory employed during actual execution of the program code bulk storage and cache memories which provide temporary storage of at least some program code in order to reduce the number of times code must be retrieved from bulk storage during execution.

Input output or I O devices including but not limited to keyboards displays pointing devices etc. can be coupled to the system either directly or through intervening I O controllers.

Network adapters may also be coupled to the system to enable the data processing system to become coupled to other data processing systems or remote printers or storage devices through intervening private or public networks. Modems cable modem and Ethernet cards are just a few of the currently available types of network adapters.

The description of the present invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description and is not intended to be exhaustive or limited to the invention in the form disclosed. Many modifications and variations will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. The embodiment was chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention the practical application and to enable others of ordinary skill in the art to understand the invention for various embodiments with various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.

