---

title: Laser pulse counter
abstract: Pulses of optical radiation are counted by a pulse counter in a way representative of its effects on tissue. An analog to digital converter digitizes detected optical radiation pulses and an integrator integrates the digitally detected pluses. The integrator has a time constant characteristic sufficient to combine digitally detected pluses that are close enough together so that they are effectively one pulse with respect to tissue exposure limits. The integrator can be programmable to a particular time constant based on a thermal confinement duration of human tissue and wavelength of laser pulses. A counter circuit counts pulses, and a display displays the counted pulses. A capture circuit enables counting the number of pulses occurring within a capture duration by the counter circuit. The analog to digital converter can be configured to a sensitivity.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07304288&OS=07304288&RS=07304288
owner: The United States of America as Represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07304288
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050706
---
The following description was made in the performance of official duties by employees of the Department of the Navy and thus the claimed invention may be manufactured used licensed by or for the United States Government for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon.

The present invention relates to a pulse counter and more particularly relates to a pulse counter for measuring optical radiation pulses considering the thermal confinement duration of tissue.

In the field of laser safety laser hazard evaluations are performed to compare laser output parameters against known safety limits to determine the potential for hazardous exposure to optical radiation. Mathematical models have been created to aid in laser hazard evaluations. Because of physiological mechanisms within the eye multiple laser pulses that occur within a certain time t known as the thermal confinement duration of tissue are biologically treated as single laser pulses within these mathematical models.

Historically most lasers that produced multiple laser pulses did so at regular intervals so that the number of pulses emitted in a period of time could easily be determined by simply multiplying the pulse repetition rate by the length of exposure. In recent years however more and more laser systems have been created that emit multiple laser pulses at irregular intervals in an effort to transfer information from one point to another. An example of this is the Marine Corps Army MILES laser weapon simulators. These lasers are used for force on force training to simulate conventional weapons. Marines and Soldiers wear vests that detect laser energy pulses that are coded by varying the number and timing of pulses. These MILES codes can represent user ID weapon type and the kill or near miss severity of a simulated hit. Since devices like these do not subscribe to the traditional pulsing techniques used previously determining the number of pulses emitted during an exposure has been very difficult to determine.

The present invention provides a laser pulse counter that allows a user to determine a number of pulses emitted regardless of any timing regularity. The laser pulse counter accounts for common values of the thermal confinement duration of tissue t. The laser pulse counter will count pulses for the most commonly needed exposure durations and will count pulses for a capture duration. The laser pulse counter has an automatic trigger mode that prohibits the capture timer from starting until the unit receives its first pulse. The laser pulse counter can be used as a traditional frequency counter by selecting a continuous capture duration of one second. The laser pulse counter has a variable sensitivity to compensate for various laser pulse detectors and can also be used to sort the number of pulses of various energy levels that exist with some irregular pulsed laser systems.

In one implementation a pulse counter counts laser pulses using an analog to digital converter and an integrator. The integrator receives laser pulses and has a sample duration. The sample duration corresponds to the thermal confinement duration of human tissue and a wavelength of a laser to be tested. The integrator outputs a single output pulse for a contiguous series of the input pulses that occur no further apart than the sample duration. The integrator can be programmed to a desired sample duration based on a kind of human tissue and wavelength of laser pulses. A capture circuit counts pulses and a display displays the counted pulses. A counter circuit enables counting the number of pulses occurring within a capture duration by the counter circuit. The analog to digital converter can be configured to sensitivity.

The details of the preferred embodiments of the invention will be readily understood from the following detailed description when read in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

A pulse laser emits pulsed optical radiation of a particular wavelength. The pulses of optical radiation are detected by a photo detector . The photo detector is any detector capable of detecting optical radiation or laser pulses. An analog to digital converter converts the analog signal representative of the optical radiation pulses into digital input pulses .

A programmable integrator is configurable to a sample duration of t. A time constant of the programmable integrator corresponds to this sample duration . The programmable integrator outputs a single output pulse for a contiguous series of the input pulses that occur no further apart than the selected sample duration . A range of sample durations for selection is preferred to accommodate different test constraints such as different tissue parameters and different wavelengths of optical radiation. A switch may be used to select among a plurality of sample durations . One sample duration choice on the switch includes a sample duration of effectively zero but in actuality equal to the effective propagation time through the circuitry. In the exemplary embodiment the propagation time through the analog to digital converter is approximately 500 nanoseconds.

Because of physiological mechanisms within human tissue such as the eye multiple laser pulses that occur within a certain time known as t are biologically treated as single laser pulses within these mathematical models. This certain length of time t is the thermal confinement duration of tissue which is represented as the sample duration of the integrator . By selecting the sample duration the integrator is programmed to have a time constant characteristic sufficient to combine sensed laser pluses that are close enough together that they are effectively one pulse with respect to optical radiation exposure limits of the tissue.

The analog to digital converter is configurable to a sensitivity in the preferred embodiment. A sensitivity can be selected to accommodate the different sensitivities of various kinds of laser pulse detectors. A variable sensitivity can also be used to sort the number of pulses of various energy levels that exist with some irregular pulsed laser systems.

A control circuit triggers a capture circuit to allow counting in a counter circuit . A counter circuit counts pulses from the programmable integrator . A display connects to the counter and digitally displays the counted pulses.

The capture circuit allows counting in the counter circuit only during the capture duration. This capture duration is the duration of exposure to optical radiation to be considered in a test. The displayed pulses represent those during this capture duration. An enable signal output of the capture circuit is gated by an AND gate to begin counting pulses from the programmable integrator . The control circuit initiates the capture based on a trigger initiated either upon operation of a start button in a manual trigger mode or upon the presence of a first pulse initiated by level detection in an automatic trigger mode.

The capture circuit allows counting in the counter circuit only during the selected capture duration of t. A selected capture duration of 0.25 seconds is the normal time used when determining eye hazard from visible laser radiation due to the natural aversion response of the eye. A person exposed to an extremely bright light will typically either blink or look away in 0.25 seconds. A capture duration of 1 second can be selected to use the pulse counter as a traditional frequency counter.

The capture circuit is useful because a small duration is difficult to take manually with a stopwatch. Frequency counters count pulses per time while the present inventions count pulses during the first tseconds. The capture circuit allows the pulse counter of the present inventions to act as a discrete event counter.

A switch may be used to select among a plurality of capture durations while a potentiometer may be used to set the sensitivity . A potentiometer however can be used to also set the capture duration and even the sample duration the disadvantage being not knowing precisely what the setting is for the respective capture duration or sample duration without means of special indicator or other display.

Because light is often defined as visible and the laser pulse counter of the present inventions will work with visible or non visible forms of optical radiation or laser pulses we refer to light as optical radiation. And because not all optical radiation is by laser the pulse counter of the present inventions will also work with broadband flashing light as an alterative to a pulsed laser. A television remote control is example of broadband pulsed radiation.

A sample duration knob allows for selection of the sample duration. The sample duration is selected among three predetermined choices 500 nanoseconds 18 microseconds and 50 microseconds. From the American National Standards Institure ANSI standard ANSI Z136.1 2000 the thermal confinement duration of tissue tis 18 us for wavelengths between 400 nm and 1050 nm and is 50 us for wavelengths between 1050 nm and 1400 nm. These wavelengths represent the most common lasers.

One sample duration choice on the switch includes a small sample duration which removes the integrator from the circuit path. This small sample duration is equal to the propagation time of the circuits which in this case is a propagation time of the analog to digital converter of approximately 500 nanoseconds. This 500 nanoseconds is the fastest separation between pulses that the analog to digital converter circuit can differentiate. Essentially in this mode the unit does not average over time.

A capture duration knob allows for selection of the capture duration. The capture duration is selected among four predetermined choices 0.25 seconds 1.0 seconds 10.0 seconds and continuous. A capture duration of 0.25 seconds is the normal time used when determining eye hazard from visible laser radiation due to the natural aversion response of the eye. A person exposed to an extremely bright light will typically either blink or look away in 0.25 seconds. A capture duration of 1 second can be selected to use the pulse counter as a traditional frequency counter.

A sensitivity knob allows for selection of a variable sensitivity using a potentiometer. A sensitivity can be selected to accommodate different sensitivities of various kinds of laser pulse detectors. A variable sensitivity can also be used to sort the number of pulses of various energy levels that exist with some irregular pulsed laser systems.

A power switch controls power supply power supplied to the pulse counter circuitry. The display elements show the user the number of pulses counted by the laser pulse counter of the present inventions. Pulse and capture LEDs are provided on the front of the cabinet of the pulse counter. The pulse LED pulse light emitting diode flashes in accordance with pulses output to the counter from the integrator. The capture LED capture light emitting diode indicates when the pulse counter is capturing these pulses.

A trigger mode switch selects between an automatic trigger mode and a manual trigger mode. In the manual trigger mode a start button is pressed by the user to start counting and a stop button is pressed by the user to stop counting. In the automatic trigger mode the pulse counter circuitry decides when to start counting. The stop button functions in both automatic trigger mode and manual trigger mode. The reset switch resets the pulse counter including its counter logic control logic and timer. When the reset switch is pressed the count on the display elements go to zero.

The programmable integrator may be made of a 74123 retriggerable monostable multivibrator. A selector switch allows selection among a plurality of sample duration. The retriggerable monostable multivibrator has two units in one package and thus allows more than one setting for the sample duration. The preferred construction of this integrator is a digital integrator an analog integrator could be used.

A capture circuit contains a timer integrated circuit having a capture duration set by a selector switch . The selector switch selects between three different resistances and trimmed by trimming resistors. A stop button is used by the user to manually stop the counting circuit.

A control circuit contains a start button and a reset button . A mode switch selects between an automatic trigger mode and manual trigger mode. The control circuit tells the capture circuit when to begin.

Pulse and capture LEDs flash in accordance with pulses output to the counter from the programmable integrator circuit and the capture circuit . The pulse LED flashes whenever the integrator emits a pulse regardless as to whether the device is counting it . This helps the user to set the sensitivity. The capture LED is lit while the device is counting the pulses from the integrator. The device is counting the pulses from the integrator while the counter circuit is enabled via the AND gate . The capture circuit creates an enable signal for the counter circuit through the AND gate . The pulse output from the integrator circuit is used to flash the pulse LED and the enable output from the capture circuit is also used to light the capture LED.

While the pulse counter has been illustrated by the drawings as discrete digital circuitry alternate constructions are possible. For instance a microprocessor implementation of the pulse counter subsequent to analog thresholding by an analog to digital converter is an alternative construction.

The pulse counter allows its user to determine the number of laser pulses regardless of their timing regularity. Furthermore the pulse counter accounts for the most common human tissue values of tand can will count pulses for the most common required exposure durations. The pulse counter can have an automatic trigger mode that prohibits the capture timer from starting until the unit receives its first pulse.

Although the invention has been described and illustrated in the above description and drawings it is understood that this description is by example only and that numerous changes and modifications can be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the true spirit and scope of the invention. Although the examples in the drawings depict only example constructions and embodiments alternate embodiments are available given the teachings of the present disclosure. Although the pulse counter has been created use with laser pulses it can be used for other systems that produce pulses. For example radio frequency RF pulse measurements can be made.

