---

title: Systems and methods for obtaining information on a key in BB84 protocol of quantum key distribution
abstract: Systems and methods for obtaining information on a key in the BB84 (Bennett-Brassard 1984) protocol of quantum key distribution are provided. A representative system comprises a quantum cryptographic entangling probe, comprising a single-photon source configured to produce a probe photon, a polarization filter configured to determine an initial probe photon polarization state for a set error rate induced by the quantum cryptographic entangling probe, a quantum controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate configured to provide entanglement of a signal with the probe photon polarization state and produce a gated probe photon so as to obtain information on a key, a Wollaston prism configured to separate the gated probe photon with polarization correlated to a signal measured by a receiver, and two single-photon photodetectors configured to measure the polarization state of the gated probe photon.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07920704&OS=07920704&RS=07920704
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 07920704
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050926
---
This application claims priority to co pending U.S. provisional application entitled Quantum Cryptographic Entangling Probe having Ser. No. 60 617 796 filed Oct. 9 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference.

The invention described herein may be manufactured used and licensed by or for the United States Government.

The present disclosure is generally related to the secure communication of encrypted data using quantum cryptography.

Research efforts by many investigators have significantly advanced the field of quantum cryptography since the pioneering discoveries of Wiesner Bennett and Brassard as shown in the following references N. Gisin G. Ribordy W. Tittel and H. Zbinden Quantum cryptography 74 pp. 145 195 2002 S. Wiesner Conjugate coding Vol. 15 No. 1 pp. 78 88 1983 C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard Quantum cryptography public key distribution and coin tossing Bangalore India pp. 175 179 IEEE 1984 C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard Quantum public key distribution system IBM Tech. Discl. Bull. Vol. 28 No. 7 pp. 3153 3163 1985 all of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties. Emphasis has been placed on quantum key distribution the generation by means of quantum mechanics of a secure random binary sequence which can be used together with the Vernam cipher one time pad as discussed in G. Vernam Cipher printing telegraph systems for secret wire and radio telegraph communications . Vol. 45 pp. 295 301 1926 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety for secure encryption and decryption. Various protocols have been devised for quantum key distribution including the single particle four state Bennett Brassard protocol BB84 Bennett 1984 the single particle two state Bennett protocol B92 as in C. H. Bennett Quantum cryptography using any two nonorthogonal states . Vol. 68 pp. 3121 3124 1992 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety and the two particle entangled state Einstein Podolsky Rosen EPR protocol as in A. K. Ekert Quantum cryptography based on Bell s theorem . Vol. 57 pp. 661 663 1991 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. However the original BB84 protocol is presently perceived as the most practical and robust protocol.

One effective implementation of the BB84 protocol uses single photons linearly polarized along one of the four basis vectors of two sets of coplanar orthogonal bases oriented at an angle of 45 degrees equivalently 4 relative to each other. The polarization measurement operators in one basis do not commute with those in the other since they correspond to nonorthogonal polarization states. At a fundamental level the potential security of the key rests on the fact that nonorthogonal photon polarization measurement operators do not commute and this results in quantum uncertainty in the measurement of those states by an eavesdropping probe as in H. E. Brandt Positive operator valued measure in quantum information processing . Vol. 67 pp. 434 439 1999 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. Before transmission of each photon the transmitter and receiver each independently and randomly select one of the two bases. The transmitter sends a single photon with polarization chosen at random along one of the orthogonal basis vectors in the chosen basis. The receiver makes a polarization measurement in its chosen basis. Next the transmitter and the receiver using a public communication channel openly compare their choices of basis without disclosing the polarization states transmitted or received. Events in which the transmitter and the receiver choose different bases are ignored while the remaining events ideally have completely correlated polarization states. The two orthogonal states in each of the bases encode binary numbers 0 and 1 and thus a sequence of photons transmitted in this manner can establish a random binary sequence shared by both the transmitter and the receiver and can then serve as the secret key following error correction and privacy amplification as in C. H. Bennett G. Brassard C. Crepeau and V. M. Maurer Generalized privacy amplification Vol. 41 pp. 1915 1923 1995 and C. H. Bennett F. Bessette G. Brassard L. Salvail and J. Smolin Experimental quantum cryptography Vol. 5 pp. 3 28 1992 both of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties. Privacy amplification is of course necessary because of the possibility of an eavesdropping attack as in Gisin 2002 Bennett 1984 and Bennett 1985 . Using the Vernam cipher the key can then be used to encode a message which can be securely transmitted over an open communication line and then decoded using the shared secret key at the receiver. The encrypted message can be created at the transmitter by adding the key to the message and can be decrypted at the receiver by subtracting the shared secret key. 

Numerous analyses of various eavesdropping strategies have appeared in the literature see e.g. Gisin 2002 . Attack approaches include coherent collective attacks in which the eavesdropper entangles a separate probe with each transmitted photon and measures all probes together as one system and also coherent joint attacks in which a single probe is entangled with the entire set of carrier photons. However these approaches require maintenance of coherent superpositions of large numbers of states.

Systems and methods for obtaining information on the BB84 protocol of quantum key distribution are provided. In this regard an embodiment of a system can be implemented as follows. A single photon source is configured to produce a probe photon. A polarization filter is configured to determine an optimum initial probe photon polarization state for a set error rate induced by the device. A quantum controlled NOT CNOT gate is configured to provide entanglement of a signal photon polarization state with the probe photon polarization state and produce a gated probe photon correlated with the signal photon so as to obtain information on a key. A Wollaston prism is configured to separate the gated probe photon with polarization appropriately correlated with a signal photon as measured by a receiver. Two single photon photodetectors are configured to measure the polarization state of the gated probe photon. The CNOT gate may be further configured to provide optimum entanglement of the signal with the probe photon polarization state so as to obtain maximum R nyi information from the signal.

An embodiment of a method for obtaining information on a key in the BB84 protocol of quantum key distribution comprises the steps of configuring a single photon source for producing a probe photon determining an initial probe photon polarization state corresponding to a set error rate induced by a probe entangling a signal with a probe photon polarization state and producing a gated probe photon separating the gated probe photon with polarization correlated with a signal measured by a receiver measuring the polarization state of the gated probe photon accessing information on polarization basis selection available on a public classical communication channel between the transmitter and the receiver and determining the polarization state measured by the receiver. A quantum CNOT gate may be further configured to provide optimum entanglement of the signal with the probe photon polarization state so as to obtain maximum R nyi information from the signal.

Other systems methods features and advantages of the present disclosure will be or become apparent to one with skill in the art upon examination of the following drawings and detailed description. It is intended that all such additional systems methods features and advantages be included within this description be within the scope of the present disclosure and be protected by the accompanying claims.

Reference is now made in detail to the description of several exemplary embodiments as illustrated in the drawings. The disclosure may however be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein rather these embodiments are intended to convey the scope of the disclosure to those skilled in the art. Furthermore all examples given herein are intended to be non limiting.

The present disclosure provides systems and methods for obtaining information on a key in the BB84 protocol of quantum key distribution. Some embodiments can be implemented as quantum cryptographic entangling probes for eavesdropping on the BB84 protocol.

For the standard four state BB84 protocol Bennett 1984 of quantum key distribution in quantum cryptography an eavesdropping probe optimization was performed by B. A. Slutsky R. Rao P. C. Sun and Y. Fainman Security of quantum cryptography against individual attacks Vol. 57 pp. 2383 2398 1998 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety which on average yields the most information to the eavesdropper for a given error rate caused by the probe. The most general possible probe consistent with unitarity was considered in which each individual transmitted bit is made to interact with the probe so that the carrier and the probe are left in an entangled state and measurement by the probe made subsequent to measurement by the legitimate receiver yields information about the carrier state. The probe can be used in an individual attack in which each transmitted photon is measured independently given that the polarization basis is revealed on the public communication channel. See the following references Slutsky 1998 as above C. A. Fuchs and A. Peres Quantum state disturbance versus information gain uncertainty relations for quantum information Vol. 53 pp. 2038 2045 1996 H. E. Brandt Probe optimization in four state protocol of quantum cryptography Vol. 66 032303 1 16 2002 H. E. Brandt Secrecy capacity in the four state protocol of quantum key distribution . Vol. 43 pp. 4526 4530 2002 H. E. Brandt Optimization problem in quantum cryptography Vol. 5 S557 560 2003 H. E. Brandt Optimum probe parameters for entangling probe in quantum key distribution Vol. 2 pp. 37 79 2003 and H. E. Brandt Optimized unitary transformation for BB84 entangling probe . Vol. 5436 pp. 48 64 2004 all of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety. It should be noted that in Equation 132 of Brandt 2004 sin and cos should be interchanged in the coefficient of w only. Also e should be e. In Equation 195 the overall sign of the coefficient of w should be rather than .

A complete optimization was performed by Brandt Probe optimization in four state protocol of quantum cryptography 2002 Optimization problem in quantum cryptography 2003 Optimum probe parameters for entangling probe in quantum key distribution 2003 and Optimized unitary transformation for BB84 entangling probe 2004 above in which three previously unknown sets of optimum probe parameters were obtained all yielding the identical maximum information gain by the probe. The probe optimizations were based on maximizing the R nyi information gain by the probe on corrected data for a given error rate induced by the probe in the legitimate receiver. A minimum overlap of the probe states which are correlated with the signal states because of the entanglement determines the maximum R nyi information gain by the probe. This is related to the idea that the more nearly orthogonal the correlated states are the easier they are to distinguish. The upper bound on R nyi information gain by the probe is needed to calculate the secrecy capacity of the BB84 protocol and to determine the number of bits which must be sacrificed during privacy amplification in order that it be exponentially unlikely that more than token leakage of the final key be available to the eavesdropper following key distillation see Brandt Secrecy capacity in the four state protocol of quantum key distribution 2002 .

Using the simplest optimal set of probe parameters it was shown by Brandt 2004 that the above unitary transformation representing the probe produces the following entanglements for initial probe state w and incoming BB84 signal states u v or respectively 

It is to be noted in Equation 1 that the projected probe state correlated with the correct received signal state see Slutsky 1998 and Brandt Optimum probe parameters for entangling probe in quantum key distribution 2003 in which the state u is sent by the transmitter and is also received by the legitimate receiver is . Analogously using Equation 2 it follows that the correlated probe state is . The two states and are to be distinguished by the measurement of the probe. Also according to Equations 3 and 4 the same two probe states and are the appropriate correlated states and respectively. This is consistent with the assumption in Section II of Slutsky 1998 that only two probe states must be distinguished by the probe.

As a basis for the present disclosure this two dimensional optimized unitary transformation Equations 1 through 4 is used to show that a simple quantum circuit representing the optimal entangling probe consists of a single CNOT gate see M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Cambridge University Press 2000 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety in which the control qubit consists of two polarization basis states of the signal the target qubit consists of two probe basis states and the initial state of the probe is set in a specific way by the error rate. A method is determined below for measuring the appropriate correlated states of the probe and a design for the entangling probe is described.

The present disclosure is a design implementation of an entangling probe which optimally entangles itself with the signal so as to obtain the maximum information on the pre privacy amplified key in the BB84 protocol of quantum key distribution.

The quantum circuit model of quantum computation is exploited to determine the quantum circuit corresponding to the optimum unitary transformation Equations 1 through 4 . It was shown in Brandt 2004 that the tensor products of the initial state w of the probe with the orthonormal basis states e and e of the signal transform as follows See Equation 1 and Equations 35 through 40 of Brandt 2004 again with the positive over all sign choice in Equation 26 of Brandt 2004 circle around circle around 9 and circle around circle around 10 expressed in terms of probe states A and A where 11 12 in which 2 1 13 2 1 14 and is given by Equation 8 .

In the two dimensional Hilbert space of the signal the two orthogonal basis states e and e are oriented symmetrically about the signal states u and v and make angles of 8 with the signal states u and v respectively e.g. Slutsky 1998 . Next consider a quantum controlled not gate CNOT gate in which the control qubit consists of the two signal basis states e e and the target qubit consists of the probe basis states w w and such that when e enters the control port then w w becomes w w at the target output port or when e enters the control port then w w remains unchanged. It then follows that a quantum circuit affecting the transformations 9 and 10 and thereby faithfully representing the entangling probe consists of this CNOT gate with the state A always entering the target port and e e entering the control port. When e enters the control port then A becomes A or when e enters the control port then A remains unchanged in agreement with Equations 9 and 10 with w A. According to the quantum circuit model of quantum computation it is known that three CNOT gates are in general necessary and sufficient in order to implement an arbitrary number of unitary transformations of two qubits G. Vidal and C. M. Dawson Universal quantum circuit for two qubit transformations with three controlled NOT gates Vol. 69 010301 1 4 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. In the present case a single CNOT gate suffices to faithfully represent the optimized unitary transformation.

Next expanding the signal state u in terms of the signal basis states using Equation 1 of Slutsky 1998 one has

One concludes that the quantum circuit consisting of the CNOT gate does in fact faithfully represent the action of the optimum unitary transformation in entangling the signal states u v and with the probe states and . It is to be emphasized that the initial state of the probe must be A given by Equation 12 . A sign choice in Equations 13 and 14 is made below consistent with the measurement procedure defined there. 

According to Equations 1 through 4 and the above analysis the probe produces the following entanglements for initial probe state w A and incoming signal states u v or respectively 

Next one notes that the correlations of the projected probe states and with the probe s two orthogonal basis states w and w are indicated according to Equations 5 and 6 by the following probabilities 

An object of the present disclosure is to provide an eavesdropping probe for obtaining maximum information on the pre privacy amplified key in the BB84 protocol of quantum key distribution. In a preferred embodiment the device is a probe that entangles itself separately with each signal photon on its way between the legitimate sender and receiver in such a way as to obtain maximum information on the pre privacy amplified key.

An incident photon coming from the legitimate transmitter is received by the probe in one of the four signal photon linear polarization states u v or in the BB84 protocol. The signal photon enters the control port of the CNOT gate. The initial state of the probe is a photon in linear polarization state A and entering the target port of the CNOT gate. The probe photon is produced by a single photon source and is appropriately timed with reception of the signal photon by first sampling a few successive signal pulses to determine the repetition rate of the transmitter. The linear polarization state A according to Equations 12 through 14 and Equation 8 with the sign choice made above is given by

The geometry of the initial and shifted probe polarization states A and A respectively and probe basis states w and w in the two dimensional Hilbert space of the probe is such that the angle between the probe state A and the probe basis state w is given by

The quantum circuit faithfully representing the optimum entangling probe consists of a single quantum controlled not gate CNOT gate in which the control qubit consists of two photon polarization basis states of the signal the target qubit consists of the two probe photon polarization basis states and the probe photon is prepared in the initial linear polarization state Equation 49 set by the induced error rate. The initial polarization state of the probe photon can be produced by a single photon source together with a linear polarizer . The probe photon can be appropriately timed with reception of a signal photon by first sampling a few successive signal pulses to determine the repetition rate of the transmitter . The gated probe photon optimally entangled with the signal enters a Wollaston prism which separates the appropriate correlated states of the probe photon to trigger one or the other of two photodetectors or . Basis selection revealed on the public channel during basis reconciliation in the BB84 protocol is exploited to correlate photodetector clicks with the signal transmitting the key and to assign the most likely binary numbers 1 or 0 such that the information gain by the quantum cryptographic entangling probe of the key prior to privacy amplification is maximal. Explicit design parameters for the entangling probe are analytically specified including 1 the explicit initial polarization state of the probe photon Equation 49 2 the transition state of the probe photon Equation 52 3 the probabilities that one or the other photodetector triggers corresponding to a 0 or 1 of the key Equations 40 and 41 4 the relative angles between the various linear polarization states in the Hilbert space of the probe Equations 53 and 55 and 5 the information gain by the probe Equation 50 .

The quantum cryptographic entangling probe is a simple special purpose quantum information processor that will improve the odds for an eavesdropper in gaining access to the pre privacy amplified key as well as imposing a potentially severe sacrifice of key bits during privacy amplification Brandt Secrecy capacity in the four state protocol of quantum key distribution 2002 . The quantum cryptographic entangling probe measures the maximum information on the pre privacy amplified key in the BB84 protocol of quantum key distribution.

It should be emphasized that the above described embodiments of the present disclosure are merely possible examples of implementations merely set forth for a clear understanding of the principles of the disclosure. Many variations and modifications may be made to the above described embodiment s of the disclosure without departing substantially from the spirit and principles of the disclosure. All such modifications and variations are intended to be included herein within the scope of this disclosure.

