---

title: Delegating right to access resource or the like in access management system
abstract: A resource of a first organization provides access thereto to a requestor of a second organization. A first administrator of the first organization issues a first credential to a second administrator of the second organization, including policy that the second administrator may issue a second credential to the requestor on behalf of the first administrator. The second administrator issues the second credential to the requester, including the issued first credential. The requestor requests access from the resource and includes the issued first and second credentials. The resource validates that the issued first credential ties the first administrator to the second administrator, and that the issued second credential ties the second administrator to the requester. The resource thus knows that the request is based on rights delegated from the first administrator to the requester by way of the second administrator.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07770206&OS=07770206&RS=07770206
owner: Microsoft Corporation
number: 07770206
owner_city: Redmond
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050311
---
The present invention relates to an access management system whereby access to a resource such as digital content or a digital service is provided only in accordance with a corresponding grant of access such as for example may be expressed in a digital license or certificate. More particularly the invention relates to delegating rights to access such a resource in a manner such that the access to the resource is granted even without specific prior knowledge of the delegation of the access grant.

Access management is highly desirable in connection with granting access to a digital resource such as a digital service or digital content which may include digital audio digital video digital text digital data digital multimedia etc. The resource can be the aforementioned content or the like a server or the like having a library of content or the like or any other or digital repository of information that a user might wish to access such as for example an electronic mail server a gaming server a network access server or point etc. Likewise the resource can be a service such as a printer a compiler a renderer or the like.

Typically in an access management context a requestor is granted access to a resource upon presenting a request with a credential identifying the requester. For example the credential may comprise a digital certificate issued to and identifying the requestor. In any event the credential is typically issued to the requestor by an issuer that is known to and trusted by the resource. For example within the context of an organization the resource may be a data file managed by a data server and the issuer may be an identity server set up by an administrator to provide an identifying credential to each member of the organization.

Upon satisfying itself based on the credential and perhaps other information that the requestor is indeed entitled to access to the requested resource such resource then provides such access. For example if the request is for a data file from the resource the resource provides such data file and if the request is to review information available from the resource the resource allows the requestor to in fact review such information.

Notably in at least some instances the resource provides data to the requester. If so the resource may choose to encrypt the data according to a format that allows the requestor to decrypt same but not others. For example it may be that the presented credential of the requestor is a digital certificate that includes a public key associated therewith and the resource encrypts the provided data according to the public key of the presented credential. Thus the requestor may apply a corresponding private key associated with the digital certificate to the encrypted data to reveal same.

Also notably the resource may choose to attach terms and conditions to the encrypted data that the requestor must abide by. If so and again presuming that the presented credential of the requestor is a digital certificate that includes a public key associated therewith the resource may encrypt the provided data according to a selected symmetric key encrypt the symmetric key according to the public key of the presented credential and place the encrypted symmetric key and the terms and conditions in a digital license. Thus the requestor may apply the corresponding private key associated with the digital certificate to the encrypted symmetric key of the license to reveal same and then apply the decrypted symmetric key to the encrypted data to reveal same presuming of course that the terms and conditions in the license so allow.

Typically the resource is presumed to have prior knowledge of the requestor or at least the administrator that provides the credential of the requestor and thus provides access to the requestor based on same. For example it maybe that the resource follows a rule that only allows access to a particular set of requesters known to the resource or that only allows access to requesters that provide a credential from a particular administrator already known to the resource. If a requester is not within such a group then such requestor is not provided with access by the resource according to the rule.

However situations exist where the requestor should be provided access even though not previously known to the resource and not within the rule followed by the resource either as being from a particular set of requestors or having a credential from a particular administrator. For example a resource within an organization ABC may be set up to follow an access rule that provides access to all employees from ABC as signified by each such employee having an appropriate credential from an ABC administrator. Nevertheless it may be that ABC has engaged contractors from XYZ and such XYZ contractors should also have access to the resource.

In the prior art then the XYZ contractors could be given access to an ABC resource by giving each such XYZ contractor an ABC credential from the ABC administrator. However the ABC administrator may be loathe to do so especially if such an ABC credential could have the effect of the XYZ contractor being treated like an ABC employee or could allow the XYZ contractor to improperly access another ABC resource.

As an alternative and also in the prior art the XYZ contractors could be given access to an ABC resource by altering the access rules for that ABC resource. For example such access rules could be altered to allow the ABC resource to provide access to a particular set of XYZ contractors based on such contractors having a credential from an XYZ administrator. However it is to be appreciated that altering the access rules for a resource can be cumbersome and burdensome especially if such access rules must be continuously altered on an ongoing basis according to changes in access policy. Moreover it is to be appreciated that altering the access rules for each of the many resources that can exist within a particular organization can easily become a gargantuan task.

Similarly it may se the case that only some employees of ABC are normally allowed to access a given resource. Over time there may be requirements to allow other employees temporary access to the resource. For example an employee with authorized access may need to grant a subordinate temporary access while they are traveling. It could also be the case they wish to allow an assistant access so they may act on their behalf for certain business processes.

In the prior art then the ABC employees who don t normally have access to the resource would be given access to the resource in the same manner as the originally authorized employees. If this requires issuing new credentials or setting new account attributes the ABC administrator may be loathe to do so especially if doing so could have the effect of granting the employees greater access rights than may be desired or requiring additional administrative actions be taken to remove such rights when the need for such access is no longer valid.

Thus a need exists for a method and mechanism by which a resource can provide access to a requester not previously known thereto based on access rules or the like. In particular a need exists for a method and mechanism by which the resource need only look to a defined source of trust be it an administrator or the like to determine whether access should be provided to a requestor. Further a need exists for a method and mechanism by which the defined source of trust can identify whether a requestor is to be provided access regardless of whether the requestor is internal to or external from the organization of the defined source of trust.

The aforementioned needs are satisfied at least in part by the present invention in which a method is provided for a resource of a first organization to provide access thereto to a requestor of a second organization. The first organization has a first administrator trusted by the resource and the second organization has a second administrator where each of the first and second administrators issues credentials to entities. Each credential as issued by an administrator to an entity ties the entity to the issuing administrator and evinces a relationship between the entity and the issuing administrator.

In the method the first administrator issues to the second administrator a first credential where the issued first credential states policy that the second administrator may issue a second credential to the requester on behalf of the first administrator. The second administrator in fact issues to the requestor the second credential on behalf of the first administrator where the issued second credential may include or reference the issued first credential. The requestor of the second organization thereafter requests access from the resource of the first organization and in doing so includes with the request the issued first credential and the issued second credential.

The resource receives the request and validates the issued first credential to confirm that the issued first credential ties the trusted first administrator to the second administrator and also to confirm that the policy of the issued first credential allowed the second administrator to issue the second credential to the requestor. Also the resource validates the issued second credential to confirm that the issued second credential ties the second administrator to the requester. Presuming such validations succeed the resource proceeds with the request to access the resource knowing that such request from such requestor is based on rights delegated from the trusted first administrator to the requester by way of the second administrator. Thus the resource of the first organization can recognize and grant access to the requester of the second organization even though such requestor is not issued any credential by the trusted first administrator of the first organization.

Similarly an end user could be allowed to delegate some or all of their rights to another end user. In the method the first administrator issues to a first end user a first credential where the issued first credential includes information necessary to determine the first end user s rights to a resource and states policy that the first end user may issue a second credential to a requestor on behalf of the first administrator. The first end user in fact issues to the requestor the second credential on behalf of the first administrator where the issued second credential may include or reference the issued first credential. The requester thereafter requests access from the resource and in doing so includes with the request the issued first credential and the issued second credential. These credentials may then be validated and used by the resource in the manner described previously by the resource to determine if access should be granted.

Although not required the invention can be implemented via an application programming interface API for use by a developer and or included within the network browsing software which will be described in the general context of computer executable instructions such as program modules being executed by one or more computers such as client workstations servers or other devices. Generally program modules include routines programs objects components data structures and the like that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Typically the functionality of the program modules may be combined or distributed as desired in various embodiments. Moreover those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention may be practiced with other computer system configurations. Other well known computing systems environments and or configurations that may be suitable for use with the invention include but are not limited to personal computers PCs automated teller machines server computers hand held or laptop devices multi processor systems microprocessor based systems programmable consumer electronics network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention may also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network or other data transmission medium. In a distributed computing environment program modules may be located in both local and remote computer storage media including memory storage devices.

With reference to an exemplary system for implementing the invention includes a general purpose computing device in the form of a computer . Components of computer may include but are not limited to a processing unit a system memory and a system bus that couples various system components including the system memory to the processing unit . The system bus may be any of several types of bus structures including a memory bus or memory controller a peripheral bus and a local bus using any of a variety of bus architectures. By way of example and not limitation such architectures include Industry Standard Architecture ISA bus Micro Channel Architecture MCA bus Enhanced ISA EISA bus Video Electronics Standards Association VESA local bus and Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI bus also known as Mezzanine bus .

Computer typically includes a variety of computer readable media. Computer readable media can be any available media that can be accessed by computer and includes both volatile and nonvolatile media removable and non removable media. By way of example and not limitation computer readable media may comprise computer storage media and communication media. Computer storage media includes both volatile and nonvolatile removable and non removable media implemented in any method or technology for storage of information such as computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data. Computer storage media includes but is not limited to RAM ROM EEPROM flash memory or other memory technology CDROM digital versatile disks DVD or other optical disk storage magnetic cassettes magnetic tape magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices or any other medium which can be used to store the desired information and which can be accessed by computer . Communication media typically embodies computer readable instructions data structures program modules or other data in a modulated data signal such as a carrier wave or other transport mechanism and includes any information delivery media. The term modulated data signal means a signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed in such a manner as to encode information in the signal. By way of example and not limitation communication media includes wired media such as a wired network or direct wired connection and wireless media such as acoustic RF infrared and other wireless media. Combinations of any of the above should also be included within the scope of computer readable media.

The system memory includes computer storage media in the form of volatile and or nonvolatile memory such as read only memory ROM and random access memory RAM . A basic input output system BIOS containing the basic routines that help to transfer information between elements within computer such as during start up is typically stored in ROM . RAM typically contains data and or program modules that are immediately accessible to and or presently being operated on by processing unit . By way of example and not limitation illustrates operating system application programs other program modules and program data .

The computer may also include other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media. By way of example only illustrates a hard disk drive that reads from or writes to non removable nonvolatile magnetic media a magnetic disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile magnetic disk and an optical disk drive that reads from or writes to a removable nonvolatile optical disk such as a CD ROM or other optical media. Other removable non removable volatile nonvolatile computer storage media that can be used in the exemplary operating environment include but are not limited to magnetic tape cassettes flash memory cards digital versatile disks digital video tape solid state RAM solid state ROM and the like. The hard disk drive is typically connected to the system bus through a non removable memory interface such as interface and magnetic disk drive and optical disk drive are typically connected to the system bus by a removable memory interface such as interface .

The drives and their associated computer storage media discussed above and illustrated in provide storage of computer readable instructions data structures program modules and other data for the computer . In for example hard disk drive is illustrated as storing operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Note that these components can either be the same as or different from operating system application programs other program modules and program data . Operating system application programs other program modules and program data are given different numbers here to illustrate that at a minimum they are different copies. A user may enter commands and information into the computer through input devices such as a keyboard and pointing device commonly referred to as a mouse trackball or touch pad. Other input devices not shown may include a microphone joystick game pad satellite dish scanner or the like. These and other input devices are often connected to the processing unit through a user input interface that is coupled to the system bus but may be connected by other interface and bus structures such as a parallel port game port or a universal serial bus USB .

A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface . A graphics interface such as Northbridge may also be connected to the system bus . Northbridge is a chipset that communicates with the CPU or host processing unit and assumes responsibility for accelerated graphics port AGP communications. One or more graphics processing units GPUs may communicate with graphics interface . In this regard GPUs generally include on chip memory storage such as register storage and GPUs communicate with a video memory . GPUs however are but one example of a coprocessor and thus a variety of co processing devices may be included in computer . A monitor or other type of display device is also connected to the system bus via an interface such as a video interface which may in turn communicate with video memory . In addition to monitor computers may also include other peripheral output devices such as speakers and printer which may be connected through an output peripheral interface .

The computer may operate in a networked environment using logical connections to one or more remote computers such as a remote computer . The remote computer may be a personal computer a server a router a network PC a peer device or other common network node and typically includes many or all of the elements described above relative to the computer although only a memory storage device has been illustrated in . The logical connections depicted in include a local area network LAN and a wide area network WAN but may also include other networks. Such networking environments are commonplace in offices enterprise wide computer networks intranets and the Internet.

When used in a LAN networking environment the computer is connected to the LAN through a network interface or adapter . When used in a WAN networking environment the computer typically includes a modem or other means for establishing communications over the WAN such as the Internet. The modem which may be internal or external may be connected to the system bus via the user input interface or other appropriate mechanism. In a networked environment program modules depicted relative to the computer or portions thereof may be stored in the remote memory storage device. By way of example and not limitation illustrates remote application programs as residing on memory device . It will be appreciated that the network connections shown are exemplary and other means of establishing a communications link between the computers may be used.

One of ordinary skill in the art can appreciate that a computer or other client device can be deployed as part of a computer network. In this regard the present invention pertains to any computer system having any number of memory or storage units and any number of applications and processes occurring across any number of storage units or volumes. The present invention may apply to an environment with server computers and client computers deployed in a network environment having remote or local storage. The present invention may also apply to a standalone computing device having programming language functionality interpretation and execution capabilities.

Distributed computing facilitates sharing of computer resources and services by direct exchange between computing devices and systems. These resources and services include the exchange of information cache storage and disk storage for files. Distributed computing takes advantage of network connectivity allowing clients to leverage their collective power to benefit the entire enterprise. In this regard a variety of devices may have applications objects or resources that may interact to implicate authentication techniques of the present invention for trusted graphics pipeline s .

It can also be appreciated that an object such as may be hosted on another computing device or . Thus although the physical environment depicted may show the connected devices as computers such illustration is merely exemplary and the physical environment may alternatively be depicted or described comprising various digital devices such as PDAs televisions MP3 players etc. software objects such as interfaces COM objects and the like.

There are a variety of systems components and network configurations that support distributed computing environments. For example computing systems may be connected together by wireline or wireless systems by local networks or widely distributed networks. Currently many of the networks are coupled to the Internet which provides the infrastructure for widely distributed computing and encompasses many different networks.

In home networking environments there are at least four disparate network transport media that may each support a unique protocol such as Power line data both wireless and wired voice e.g. telephone and entertainment media. Most home control devices such as light switches and appliances may use power line for connectivity. Data Services may enter the home as broadband e.g. either DSL or Cable modem and are accessible within the home using either wireless e.g. HomeRF or 802.11b or wired e.g. Home PNA Cat 5 even power line connectivity. Voice traffic may enter the home either as wired e.g. Cat 3 or wireless e.g. cell phones and may be distributed within the home using Cat 3 wiring. Entertainment media may enter the home either through satellite or cable and is typically distributed in the home using coaxial cable. IEEE 1394 and DVI are also emerging as digital interconnects for clusters of media devices. All of these network environments and others that may emerge as protocol standards may be interconnected to form an intranet that may be connected to the outside world by way of the Internet. In short a variety of disparate sources exist for the storage and transmission of data and consequently moving forward computing devices will require ways of protecting content at all portions of the data processing pipeline.

The Internet commonly refers to the collection of networks and gateways that utilize the TCP IP suite of protocols which are well known in the art of computer networking. TCP IP is an acronym for Transport Control Protocol interface Program. The Internet can be described as a system of geographically distributed remote computer networks interconnected by computers executing networking protocols that allow users to interact and share information over the networks. Because of such wide spread information sharing remote networks such as the Internet have thus far generally evolved into an open system for which developers can design software applications for performing specialized operations or services essentially without restriction.

Thus the network infrastructure enables a host of network topologies such as client server peer to peer or hybrid architectures. The client is a member of a class or group that uses the services of another class or group to which it is not related. Thus in computing a client is a process i.e. roughly a set of instructions or tasks that requests a service provided by another program. The client process utilizes the requested service without having to know any working details about the other program or the service itself. In a client server architecture particularly a networked system a client is usually a computer that accesses shared network resources provided by another computer e.g. a server. In the example of computers etc. can be thought of as clients and computer etc. can be thought of as the server where server etc. maintains the data that is then replicated in the client computers etc.

A server is typically a remote computer system accessible over a remote network such as the Internet. The client process may be active in a first computer system and the server process may be active in a second computer system communicating with one another over a communications medium thus providing distributed functionality and allowing multiple clients to take advantage of the information gathering capabilities of the server.

Client and server communicate with one another utilizing the functionality provided by a protocol layer. For example Hypertext Transfer Protocol HTTP is a common protocol that is used in conjunction with the World Wide Web WWW . Typically a computer network address such as a Universal Resource Locator URL or an Internet Protocol IP address is used to identify the server or client computers to each other. The network address can be referred to as a Universal Resource Locator address. For example communication can be provided over a communications medium. In particular the client and server may be coupled to one another via TCP IP connections for high capacity communication.

Thus illustrates an exemplary networked or distributed environment with a server in communication with client computers via a network bus in which the present invention may be employed. In more detail a number of servers etc. are interconnected via a communications network bus which may be a LAN WAN intranet the Internet etc. with a number of client or remote computing devices etc. such as a portable computer handheld computer thin client networked appliance or other device such as a VCR TV oven light heater and the like in accordance with the present invention. It is thus contemplated that the present invention may apply to any computing device in connection with which it is desirable to process store or render secure content from a trusted source.

In a network environment in which the communications network bus is the Internet for example the servers can be Web servers with which the clients etc. communicate via any of a number of known protocols such as HTTP. Servers may also serve as clients as may be characteristic of a distributed computing environment. Communications may be wired or wireless where appropriate. Client devices may or may not communicate via communications network bus and may have independent communications associated therewith. For example in the case of a TV or VCR there may or may not be a networked aspect to the control thereof. Each client computer and server computer may be equipped with various application program modules or objects and with connections or access to various types of storage elements or objects across which files may be stored or to which portion s of files may be downloaded or migrated. Thus the present invention can be utilized in a computer network environment having client computers etc. that can access and interact with a computer network bus and server computers etc. that may interact with client computers etc. and other devices and databases .

As is known and referring now to in access management as applied to digital information within the context of an organization or the like a requester within the organization requesting information from a resource of the organization must present a credential to the resource that identifies the requestor and that may for example include the relationship of the requestor to the organization .

As may be appreciated the organization may be any appropriate type of organization without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. For example the organization may be a public corporation a private company a governmental body a non profit charity a research foundation etc. As may also be appreciated the requestor within the organization may be any appropriate requestor also without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. For example the requestor may be any employee a director a supervisor an officer etc.

Generally the resource receives requests for access to digital information or services and provides such access according to pre defined rules. Such digital information may include digital content or data or the like and such digital services may include printing services rendering services data transformation services or the like. Thus such resource and such digital information may be any appropriate digital resource and digital information without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention.

The pre defined rules that the resource follows in providing access to a requestor may be any rules without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. Within the context of the present invention such rules at least implicitly require that the requestor present the credential to the resource and may also require that the requestor have a minimum level of position within the organization as might be set forth within the credential that the requestor have the right to access the resource as might be set forth within the credential and the like. Such rules might for example also require that the request from the requester be received at a particular time of day that the requestor be accessing the resource by way of a particular type of connection etc.

The credential as presented by and representing the requestor maybe any appropriate credential without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. Typically the credential is a digital certificate as issued to the requestor by an administrator of the organization that is trusted by the resource but could be some other form of identifying indicia. Presuming that the credential is in fact a digital certificate such digital certificate may have information therein as is appropriate for identifying the requestor . For example the digital certificate may include the name of the requestor the position of the requester within the organization the rights of the requestor within the organization a validity period etc. Typically such digital certificate is signed based on the contents thereof and according to a private key of a public private key pair and may be validated according to an attached chain of certificates including the corresponding public key.

The digital certificate may itself have an associated public private key pair with the public key in the certificate . Thus the resource may respond to a requestor with data encrypted either directly or indirectly according to the public key of the certificate of such requestor . Accordingly the requestor may access such data by appropriate application of the corresponding private key of the certificate .

The administrator may be any appropriate administrator that is trusted by the resource in the course of making access determinations without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention presuming of course that the administrator is capable of issuing credentials certificates to requestors . Presumably the rules of the resource require that any request from any requestor be tied back to the trusted administrator by including a credential certificate therefrom.

As was set forth above a resource within an organization in deciding whether to provide access to a requestor typically reviews the credentials proffered by the requestor and ensures that the credentials tie back to the trusted administrator of the organization . However and significantly a requestor can oftentimes lack the appropriate credential or not be allowed access to a resource based on a proffered credential alone and yet should nevertheless be allowed access to the resource based on decisions by other trustworthy entities. In addition a requestor can oftentimes not be within the organization and not have credentials from the organization and yet should nevertheless be allowed access to the resource of the organization.

More generally in an era where an application can be multi tiered distributed across multiple organizations spanning multiple administrative boundaries and or involve multiple entities with dynamic relationships access to resources in accordance with operation of such an application necessarily requires crossing boundaries including administrative environments. Thus a resource from a first organization needs to be able to recognize and grant access to a requester from a second organization that is not credentialed by the trusted administrator of the first organization . However and again the resource of the first organization should at least still require that the requestor from the second organization establish some tie back to the trusted administrator of the first organization .

While the rules for the resource of the first organization can be updated on a regular basis to alter who may access such resource either by changing specific requester rights or representing the tie of the requestor from the second organization to the administrator of the first organization such updating is cumbersome burdensome fraught with risk and an avenue for security risks. Accordingly and in one embodiment of the present invention the rules for the resource of the first organization only require that the requester from the second organization be delegated the right to access such resource either directly or indirectly from the administrator of the first organization . Such delegation may be embodied as a delegation policy in a credential such as a digital certificate . Significantly by requiring delegation by way of such credential certificate the certificate may be provided with constraints that limit or restrict the rights the requestor has with regard to the resource .

Turning now to if it is presumed that two organizations respectively have an administrator that the resource is associated with organization and trusts administrator only and that the requestor is associated with the organization the present invention may be effectuated in the following manner and as shown in . Preliminarily administrator of organization sends administrator of organization a credential stating policy to the effect that administrator of organization may issue a credential on behalf of administrator of organization and with respect to one or more resources of the organization step . Such credential then is a delegation of the issuing right of the administrator of the organization to the administrator of the organization . Note that the credential may state that the credential can be issued by the administrator of the organization to a particular requestor of the organization or may specify a particular set of such requesters or may specify all requestors of the organization

At any rate the administrator of the organization with the delegating credential from the administrator of the organization and based thereon in fact issues the delegated credential to the requestor of the organization . Significantly and in one embodiment of the present invention the credential ties the requestor to the administrator and the credential ties the administrator to the administrator . For example and in the case where the credentials are digital certificates and as shown in each administrator has a public private key PU A PU B PR A PR B the certificate includes the public key of the administrator PU B and is signed by the private key of the administrator PR A and the certificate is signed by the private key of the administrator PR B .

Thus when the administrator issues the delegated credential certificate to the requestor such administrator includes with the certificate the delegating certificate in the manner of a chain of certificates step . Thereafter and at some point the requestor in fact requests access from the resource and in doing so includes with the request the chain of certificates step . Upon receiving the request the resource as part of deciding whether to honor same validates the chain of certificates to determine that the trusted administrator in fact delegated the right to so access to the requestor by way of the administrator . In particular based on presumed knowledge of PU A the resource applies such PU A to S PR A from the delegating certificate to validate same step and presuming such validation succeeds the resource then obtains PU B from the delegating certificate step and applies such PU B to S PR B from the delegated certificate to validate same step . Here presuming such validation succeeds the request can proceed with the resource being secure in the knowledge that the request from the requestor is based on rights delegated from the trusted administrator by way of the administrator step .

As thus far set forth the chain of delegation extends from the trusted administrator to the administrator and from the administrator to the requestor . However and significantly delegation can extend multiple links from a source of trust as honored by the resource and can extend with multiple branches to multiple requestors all without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. Moreover and in one embodiment of the present invention by using credentials to establish the links each such credential can be provided with policy that a requestor must satisfy before a resource provides access thereto.

Thus it may be that the following distributed policy is created by way of appropriate issuance of credentials 

Thus when the resource receives a request for access from a requestor accompanied by a chain of credentials from administrators and the resource can employ the policy stated within all of such credentials to determine whether to grant access. More generally each link as represented by a credential represents a constrained delegation of the right to identify requestors that can gain access to a resource and each link also provides authoritative statements declaring policy that a requestor must follow before such access is provided. Significantly by storing such policy in each credential the resource need not refer to any particular central repository of policy and need not have any prior knowledge of the requestor or any administrator other than . Instead the resource honors the policy in a chain of credentials because the chain originates at a point of trust administrator and ends at the requestor requesting access from the resource and because each credential in the chain ties such requestor back to such trusted administrator by way of the validated signature thereof.

It is to be appreciated that policy as set forth within a credential can be any policy without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. For example the policy can provide the possessor of such credential with full authority to access all resources of the organization or can set limits with regard to specific requestors that can request based on the credential specific resources that can be accessed based on the credential time limitations geographic limitations an expiration restrictions on access rights restrictions on communications protocols and the like. The policy within a credential may also require that the resource check with a revocation list to determine that the credential has not been revoked. The policy could even specify a maximum number of linked credentials conditions precedent to exercising rights or actions that must be performed subsequent to exercising rights. Conceivably the policy could even refer to one or more external locations at which additional policy can be found.

Policy within a credential may be expressed in any appropriate manner without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. For example such policy may be expressed in a policy statement of the form 

The policy statement as set forth above can be encoded in any appropriate manner without departing from the spirit and scope of the present invention. For example the policy statement could be encoded in an ASN.1 structure for integration into an X.509 certificates or Kerberos ticket. However recognizing that not all encodings and structures may fully support such policy statement and in one embodiment of the present invention the policy statement and the containing credential are constructed according to an eXtensible Markup Language XML that defines a standard such the MPEG Rights Expression Language REL as approved by the International Organization for Standardization ISO which already has requisite syntactic forms designed in.

Note that although the present invention has thus far been set forth in terms of a requester with a pair of linked credentials from two administrators the chain of credentials may extend with any number of links representing any number of administrators and even any number of other requesters . Presumably and as should now be appreciated a requester with a particular chain of credentials and wishing to access a resource based thereon can in fact access such resource but only if the chain of credentials reaches back to a root of trust recognized by the resource and also only if policy within each credential in fact allows such accessing.

Thus and significantly one piece of policy that may be stated in a credential is whether the rights in the credential may be delegated by way of issuance of a linked credential to a particular requestor . For example it may be the case that a first requestor with a first credential to access a particular resource may by way of specific policy within such first credential delegate such ability to access such particular resource to a second requestor by way of issuance of a second credential from the first requester to the second requester . Likewise it may be the case that such first requester can delegate to the second requestor by way of such second credential but that the delegation policy in the first credential restricts the delegation to a specific subset of rights.

Thus it should be appreciated that with the present invention as set forth above a first requestor with a first credential can delegate its rights to access a given resource to a second requestor by way of issuance of a second credential thereto but only if the first requestor is authorized to do so according to policy set forth within the first credential . Presumably the second requestor cannot access the resource based on any other credentials in possession of such second requestor .

Generally in such a delegation a first administrator known to the resource issues the first requestor a first credential identifying and possibly indicating an allowed resource access. Importantly the first administrator also states within the first credential a policy to the effect that the first requestor may act as an intermediary and thus grant the right to a second requester to act on behalf of the first requestor for the purpose of accessing the resource . Alternative the policy may be stated in an ancillary credential referencing the first credential . The first requestor then issues the second requestor the second credential where the second credential states policy regarding the rights the second requester is to have in accessing the resource . As before the second credential includes or refers to the first credential . The second requestor thereafter requests access from the resource and includes the first and second credentials with such request to allow the resource to make an access decision.

In particular and similar to before the resource receives the request and validates the issued second credential to confirm issuance thereof by the holder of the first credential and also validates the issued first credential to confirm issuance thereof by the first administrator . The resource then checks that the delegated rights in the second credential conform to the policy in the first credential . Presuming such validations and policy checks succeed the resource proceeds with the request to access knowing that such request from such second requestor is based on rights properly delegated from the first requestor . Thus and again the resource can recognize and grant access to the second requestor even though such second requestor is not directly issued any credential granting access to the resource by the first administrator .

It is to be appreciated that while the present disclosure speaks in terms of a resource performing certain actions it may in fact be the case that a resource manager is performing such actions on behalf of the resource . As may be appreciated it is in fact oftentimes the case that a resource manager manages a resource and enforces access control decisions for the resource . Nevertheless unless otherwise necessary a resource performing an action can be considered the equivalent of a resource manager performing the action on behalf of the resource and vice versa.

The programming necessary to effectuate the processes performed in connection with the present invention is relatively straight forward and should be apparent to the relevant programming public. Accordingly such programming is not attached hereto. Any particular programming then may be employed to effectuate the present invention without departing from the spirit and scope thereof.

In the present invention a method and mechanism are provided by which a resource can provide access to a requestor not previously known thereto based on access rules or the like. Instead the resource need only look to a defined source of trust be it an administrator or the like to determine whether access should be provided to a requestor . The defined source of trust can identify whether a requester is to be provided access regardless of whether the requester is internal to or external from the organization of the defined source of trust by delegating rights to such requestor by way of an issued credential .

It should be appreciated that changes could be made to the embodiments described above without departing from the inventive concepts thereof. It should be understood therefore that this invention is not limited to the particular embodiments disclosed but it is intended to cover modifications within the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims.

