---

title: Disposable sleep and breathing monitor
abstract: An apparatus comprises a mask, a sensor body configured to be attached to the mask, and an electronic module for producing an output in response to air flow through the sensor body.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09415182&OS=09415182&RS=09415182
owner: Key Technologies, Inc.
number: 09415182
owner_city: Baltimore
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050826
---
This application claims the benefit of International Application No. PCT US2005 030328 filed Aug. 26 2005 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 605 252 filed Aug. 27 2004 and Ser. No. 60 652 588 filed Feb. 14 2005 which are incorporated herein by reference.

This invention was made with U.S. government support under grant no. HL072126. The U.S. government has certain rights in the invention.

This invention relates to air flow monitors and more particularly to air flow monitors for use in monitoring breathing for prolonged time periods.

The gold standard for the measurement of respiratory air flow is the pneumotachograph which determines flow by measuring differential pressure across a fine screen in the flow stream. Pneumotachographs are widely used but limited to 1 short term measurements of ventilation in respiratory medicine and exercise testing and 2 long term measurements in intubated and unconscious patients who are dependent on a conventional ventilator. The pneumotachograph is rarely used for long term measurements of ventilation in non intubated conscious patients and during sleep due to the weight of the pneumotachograph and the discomfort of the pneumotachograph and a mask and headgear that must be worn. However there is a tremendous need to monitor ventilation in several medical disciplines particularly during sleep as sleep unmasks several respiratory disorders which remain undetected by short term measurements of ventilation during wakefulness.

Sleep induces changes in the respiratory system that affect the central control of either ventilation or upper airway patency. As a consequence patients may exhibit sleep related breathing disorders that show a clinical spectrum from obstructive sleep apnea to severe hypoventilation in patients with co morbid cardiopulmonary and neurological disorders. Although the impact of sleep on ventilation is well recognized quantitative measurement of ventilation has not been well established in clinical diagnostics. This is in part due to the inability to monitor air flow during longer time periods. Instead less valuable qualitative measures of air flow using a nasal cannula or thermistors are typically performed for diagnosing sleep disordered breathing. Nasal cannulas nasal prongs thermistor based devices and other qualitative air flow measurement devices are used regularly for overnight sleep studies because they are significantly more comfortable for the patient than pneumotachographs. These semi quantitative measures of respiration are used to detect apneas and hypopneas by correlating relative changes in the measurement but they are neither suited to quantify the degree of upper airway function e.g. but not limited to peak inspiratory air flow inspiratory and expiratory resistance nor to quantify the level of ventilatory impairment e.g. but not limited to tidal volume and minute ventilation . Moreover recent studies demonstrate that using a quantitative air flow measurement for sleep studies will also improve the detection of mild degrees of sleep related breathing disorders which remain undetected by the current state of measuring ventilation during sleep. This matter is particularly important in children in which mild degrees of upper airway obstruction snoring leads to substantial daytime impairments. Likewise subtle respiratory disturbances during sleep may trigger adverse cardiovascular events in adults with co morbid conditions. In summary the lack of a high quality quantitative air flow measurement during sleep studies represents a significant loss of valuable clinical information that limits diagnostic accuracy and clinical care. In particular quantitative flow measurement would allow clinicians to directly measure key respiratory parameters such as breath by breath tidal volume inspiratory flow rates and timing indices over prolonged periods of time.

Particularly in children investigators have established that even mild disturbances of breathing during sleep impact academic performance and predict the presence of attention deficit disorders in children. Moreover early detection of these sleep related breathing disturbances and consequently treatment of these disturbances has been shown to improve these adverse effects.

Currently no device exists for obtaining a quantitative measurement of respiration during sleep without disturbing the patient. The pneumotachograph is too cumbersome for use during sleep and the nasal cannula or thermistor only provides a qualitative but not quantitative measure of ventilation.

In summary particularly in sleep medicine there is a need for a device that is both comfortable and provides a quantitative accurate measure of air flow for early detection of sleep related breathing disturbances.

This invention provides an apparatus comprising a mask a sensor body configured to be attached to the mask and an electronic module for producing an output in response to air flow through the sensor body. One version of the apparatus include a light weight headgear for the mask that incorporates electrodes and probes for sensing biomedical signals such as but not limited to oxygen saturation muscle activity EMG brain wave activity EEG and eye movements EOG as well as head position and heart rate.

In another aspect the invention provides an apparatus comprising a sensor body defining an air passage and configured to be inserted in a breathing tube wherein the air passing includes a portion having a reduced cross sectional area an upstream tube opening and a downstream tube opening positioned in the portion of the air passage having a reduced cross sectional area and an electronic module for producing an output representative of air flow in response to differential pressure between pressure at the upstream tube opening and a downstream tube opening the sensor body.

This invention provides a light weight low dead space disposable breathing sensor and a monitor which can be used for long term measurements of tidal breathing through a nose mask face mask tracheostomy or ventilator tubing without adding significant dead space to the airway. In one application the invention is used for adults and demonstrates that the combined dead space of a small nasal mask and the flow sensor is less than 15 milliliter. Thus the invention provides an apparatus for measuring air flow quantitatively for prolonged time in non intubated Model A in Table 2 and below or intubated Model B in Table 2 and below individuals while keeping the added dead space in a range known to be insignificant during sleep. Data from sleep studies in adults show that the breathing monitor is extraordinarily comfortable when worn during sleep and provides an accurate quantitative measurement of ventilation and respiratory dynamics during sleep.

The light weight of the breathing sensor and flow monitor also obviates the need for wearing a heavy headgear for a tight fit of a mask. Instead light weighted straps can be used to attach the mask at the nose or face for higher comfort. Two versions of the apparatus have been designed. One version is a flow sensor incorporated in a small nose or face mask attached with only a tiny strap for tightening the mask at the nose or face. A second version provides a light weighted headgear that incorporates electrodes and probes for sensing biomedical signals such as but not limited to oxygen saturation muscle activity EMG brain wave activity EEG and eye movements EOG as well as head position and heart rate. Thus the invention allows an easy and ready to use measure of tidal ventilation while measuring sleep parameters oxygen saturation and body position.

Oxygen saturation is measured by using state of the art pulse oximeters that can be modified to measure oxygen saturation of the forehead or nose. Solid state inclinometers such as the SQ SI Series chips provided by SignalQuest Inc can be used to sense head position. The sensors can either be integrated into the electronics module attached to the flow sensor or located in a separate electronics module attached to the patient s head remote from the mask. In the latter case the remote electronics module can communicate with the base unit either via a small wire or wirelessly. A thermistor located on the end of an arm attached to the mask provides a qualitative measure of leakage flow through the mouth. The arm can be snapped to the mask in such a way as to allow for removal of the thermistor assembly in the event that a mouth leakage flow measurement is not desired. The arm can be adjustable to allow the user to position the thermistor directly over the patient s mouth. Electronics to process the thermistor reading will be incorporated into the electronics module for the flow sensor. EEG EOG EMG and heart rate sensors can be incorporated into headgear and electronics.

In addition to the low dead space flow sensor and light weight headgear with or without electrodes and probes several embodiments are designed to improve handling and comfort for wearing the apparatus and for improving data integrity and artifact elimination. One embodiment of the invention removes the tubes for monitoring the air flow from the sensing part of the apparatus. This embodiment uses an electronics module that is directly attached to the sensing part of the apparatus and only a thin wire can be connected to the flow monitor in a bedside unit for data output and power. Alternatively a wireless interface can be provided to transmit the monitored signals to an external unit.

Another feature of the apparatus is that the flow monitoring unit of the apparatus provides quantitative calibrated measurements of air flow for long term measurement of ventilation. The breathing monitor delivers a stable pre calibrated air flow signal which allows for the quantification of ventilation and obviates the need to perform laborious calibration routines prior to each measurement.

Finally the flow sensing parts of the apparatus can be made of inexpensive plastic parts. Thus the sensor can be applied as a single use since it is designed as an inexpensive and disposable device for quantitative measurements of ventilation. This is particularly important when measurement of ventilation is warranted in infectious diseases that are known to affect ventilation such as but not limited to SARS pneumonia and TBC.

An air flow sensor such as thermistor can be added to measure leakage through the mouth. A thermistor assembly can include a semicircular ring that snaps onto the mask ring. The snap fit allows for adjustment of the thermistor directly over the mouth of the patient.

The ends of the tubes are positioned substantially along a central axis of the air passage and are spaced from the ends of the sensor body. The tubes penetrate the wall of the sensor body at an angle such that tubes are tilted away from the mask. This allows the sensor body to have a smaller axial length.

The sensor body can be fabricated using a medical grade injection molded plastic for example ABS PVC or Polycarbonate . The sensor body and flexible tubing can be assembled sterilized and packaged as a single disposable unit. The sensor body can be fabricated with sufficient geometric tolerances such that any differences in the internal geometry of different sensor bodies cannot affect the flow rate measurement.

The mask can be fabricated using a soft durometer material for example silicone latex or similar materials . is a pictorial representation of a breathing monitor constructed in accordance with the invention. The monitor includes a mask a sensor body and an electronics module . Tubes and are connected between the sensor body and the electronics module. The electronics module includes a molded plastic enclosure containing an electronic circuit board an interface for the tubing from the sensor body and an interface for a signal from an oximeter which can be incorporated into the mask assembly. Standard industrial oximeter probes as they are used in pediatric medicine can be integrated into the mask and located for example at the bridge of the nose or alternatively at the forehead.

The inline flowmeter uses the same measurement approach as the mask flowmeter. However the measurement section of the inline meter has a small flow area relative to the attached tubing a feature that is not included in the mask meter because of geometric constraints . The reduced flow area constricts the flow resulting in a flatter more uniform velocity profile which produces a smoother flow signal with less turbulence induced noise. Furthermore the reduced section significantly reduces the impact of upstream flow geometry on the measured flow rate. For instance upstream bends in the tubing have virtually no impact on the flow measurement which would not be the case without the reduced section.

In each embodiment the monitor measures the volume flow rate based on a measured differential pressure P. The differential pressure is the difference between the pressure in the tube having an end pointing upstream and the pressure in the tube having an end pointing downstream. The volumetric flow rate Q is calculated as square root over where C is a calibration constant that is dependent on the geometry of the sensor body and the density of the fluid being measured.

The electronics module can include a molded plastic enclosure containing an electronics circuit board a display an external power jack and a connector for output of the flow rate signal. The circuit board can contain a Micro Electro Mechanical system MEMs differential pressure sensor and the necessary electronics components for converting the analog voltage equivalent to the differential pressure into either a voltage or current equivalent to the calculated flow rate. The sensor can have sufficiently small linearity error and hysteresis to not affect the flow rate measurement.

Gas flow measurement can be performed using a number of methods. The flow sensor of the invention uses the measure of the difference between total and static pressure to calculate the air velocity and then determines flow rate based on that velocity. This approach is widely used in many industries the most familiar implementation is the Pitot tube and is based on the Bernoulli Equation constant where p pressure density V velocity g gravity and h elevation.

The equation is a valid ideal measure at any point along a stream line for steady flows with constant density and for which friction is negligible. As shown in the flow sensor includes two pressure measurement ports located at the centerline of the flow sensor one pointing upstream and one pointing downstream. Applying Bernoulli s Equation to this configuration the differential pressure measured between the ports relates to the fluid velocity as where pis the upstream pressure pis the downstream pressure and V is the velocity at the centerline of the flow sensor.

The flow rate is calculated from the centerline velocity as where Q flow rate A cross sectional area of the flow sensor and C correction factor to account for the velocity profile in the flow sensor.

In turbulent flow in a tube the velocity profile is effectively flat thus C is very close to 1.0. In fully developed laminar flow in a tube the velocity profile is parabolic and C is closer to 0.5. Consequently C varies with velocity and must be determined experimentally in all but the most ideal flow conditions. Instrument calibration serves to establish a value for C depending on the 1 embodiment of the invention 2 the flow rate and 3 the direction of the air flow. The use of a repeatable manufacturing process for the metering section precludes the need for calibration before each use as is currently required for existing pneumotachographs .

Data acquired using early flow sensor prototypes are shown below. Collection of the data was covered by IRB protocol 04 05 18 02 entitled Trans Nasal Insuflation for the Treatment of Snoring and Obstructive Apnea with continued use through IRB protocol number 05 03 10 01.

One of the key features of an accurate ventilation measurement is flow measurement stability i.e. lack of drift over a long term measurement. Tidal volume is obtained by integrating a flow measurement so if an inaccurate flow sensor drifts over time errors can accrue to unacceptable levels for tidal volume and minute ventilation the volume of air ventilated in one minute .

The snoring pattern in is associated with no significant changes in the oxygen saturation SaO or the peak inspiratory flow. These two indicators have historically been relied upon for diagnosis of adequate ventilation and they would both suggest in this case that the patient is getting adequate ventilation during the snoring period. However the flow sensor measures ventilation and allows the clinician to observe that tidal volumes V significantly decreased during this period. As shown in the tidal inspiratory volumes at the end of a snoring period reduces tidal volume substantially e.g. tidal inspiratory volumes are less than 200 ml which is slightly above the anatomic dead space of the upper airway . In other words although there is significant air flow throughout the snoring period tidal volume declines to levels such that almost all of the inspiratory air is entering the anatomic dead space upper airways but no longer entering the lungs. In summary this example illustrates that the measurement of tidal volume allows the physician to determine the degree of upper airway obstruction and ventilation not yet possible with current semi quantitative measurements of air flow.

Flow measurement in the range 0 Lpm to 200 Lpm compares to the pneumotachograph to within 5 Lpm. Special consideration can be given to the low flow regime less than 20 Lpm that is critically important for diagnosing sleep disorders such as hypopnea and hypoventilation. Dead space volume of the sensor is less than 3 ml and the nose mask is less than 15 milliliters both of which maintains patient comfort and minimize re breathing of exhalation. A frequency response of up to 100 Hz is used to ensure that snoring can be detected. A flow resistance of less than 1.0 cm H0 1 sec 200 l min maintains patient comfort.

The inline meter shown in could also be equipped with on board electronics similar to the mask flow sensor. For example an electronics module could be mounted on the sensor body where tubes and exit the body.

The sensor subsystem includes a MEMs based differential pressure sensor that uses an on board ASIC to collect pressure readings from a MEMS diaphragm providing a stable temperature compensated reading. The pressure sensor can be for example a Silicon Microstructures SM5812 differential pressure sensor although several alternatives to that sensor are commercially available.

The data processing system is responsible for acquiring sensor data processing acquired data and reporting results in several different output formats. In one embodiment all data processing is performed using a Cygnal C8051F000 8051 based mixed signal microcontroller. Improved precision can be provided by using at least a 16 bit A D converter ADC .

The data acquisition system is responsible for taking high speed data samples from the pressure sensor. The data acquisition system includes a voltage divider that feeds the divided input voltage from the sensor into an analog to digital converter ADC internal to the microcontroller. The input of the ADC is polled at a rate of 50 kHz for short periods of time in order to obtain a maximum number of measurements possible in the shortest period of time. This allows for a high degree of signal averaging yielding an effective 16 bits of ADC resolution from a 12 bit ADC core in the case of the prototype electronics .

The data processing subsystem applies mathematical models to the differential pressure information supplied by the data acquisition subsystem and converts the differential reading into a flow rate. The input to this system is the digital data supplied by the data acquisition subsystem. The output from this system is the calculated air flow measurement.

A data reporting posting system is responsible for taking input data from the data processing subsystem and making this information available to the end user. A 0 5 V DC output voltage signal proportional to the measured air flow is provided. This signal can travel through the wire connecting the flow sensor to the tabletop module and can be available to the user at the BNC jack on the tabletop module.

Tables 1 4 compare state of the art pneumotachographs and nasal masks with the invention. Table 1 shows several parameters for available pneumotachographs. Table 2 shows the same parameters for devices made in accordance with this invention. Table 3 shows several parameters for available CPAP systems. Table 4 shows the same parameters for devices made in accordance with this invention.

The sleep and breathing monitor of this invention could be used in several settings applications including as a portable breathing monitor for use in inpatient and outpatient units intensive care units in post surgery transitional care units and in pediatric units for monitoring ventilation in patients with neural disorders or heart and lung diseases and infants at risk for breathing disturbances or SIDS. The invention can also be used as a sleep apnea monitor. In conjunction with automated signal processing the sleep and breathing monitor may become a screening tool for early detection of sleep apnea Cheyne Stokes Respiration in patients with heart failure or pulmonary and neurological diseases.

The invention can also be used as an alveolar hypoventilation monitor. Alveor hypoventilation predisposes to respiratory failure. Contributing factors are morbid obesity and neuromuscular disturbances particular during sleep. Currently there is no device that accurately allows the determination of the level alveolar ventilation.

The invention can provide respiration flow measurement in the range 0 Lpm to 200 Lpm and has an accuracy comparable to the pneumotachograph. Wider or narrower flow ranges can be obtained by selecting different commercially available pressure sensors. The MEMs sensors are particularly accurate in the low flow regime less than 20 Lpm that is critically important for diagnosing sleep disorders such as hypopnea and hypoventilation. The dead space volume is less than 20 milliliters to maintain patient comfort and minimize re breathing of exhalation. A frequency response of up to 100 Hz is provided to ensure that snoring can be detected. A flow resistance of less than 1.0 cm HO L sec 200 L min maintains patient comfort. In addition to the above performance criteria estimated production level manufacturing costs are sufficiently low to support a single use disposable flow metering section. A display item in unit shows continuous stable air flow signal throughout an entire sleep study.

The invention can be used to classify subtle respiratory events during sleep such as hypopneas and hypoventilation not yet possible with standard PSG pulse oximeter respiratory effort EEG sensors due to inaccuracies of nasal cannulas and thermistors. A snap together interface for the electronics module and the flow sensor can be used to improve cleanibility and make the flow sensor disposable. Inclusion of a nose or forehead mounted pulse oximeter which coupled with the flow measurement can make an improved package for monitoring ventilation especially in ambulatory applications.

Moreover the invention allows detection of expiratory airway obstruction. Thus overnight sleep studies in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD and asthma with known degrees of upper airway obstruction and expiratory flow limitation can be used to demonstrate the ability to determine degrees of upper airway obstruction and expiratory flow limitation from a continuous air flow signal not yet possible with standard PSG sensors.

The breathing monitor permits a Plug and Play use without performing laborious calibration procedures. The sensors for measuring ventilation and sleep can be integrated into the mask and headgear for making measurements easily applicable even for non specialized health care providers. The disposable unit allows for single use of the flow monitor to prevent transmission of communicable diseases. The single use of the breathing monitor makes it unnecessary to sterilize the device prior to each measurement. The invention is compact compared to the bulky state of the art polysomnographic monitor systems which extends the range of applicability in areas not yet possible e.g. in infants with smaller airways or in adults too sick to be transferred to specialized centers.

This invention solves four problems associated with state of the art polysomnography while providing a comparable accuracy. First in one embodiment the flow sensor unit includes a MEM Micro Electro Mechanical pressure transducers which are highly sensitive and stable once they have been pre calibrated. This stability makes time consuming calibration procedures unnecessary prior to each measurement and provides accurate measurements over time. Thus the air flow monitor guarantees an accurate measurement of ventilation for individuals and patients and is particularly suited for detecting sleep related breathing disorders.

Second the electrical sensors can be integrated in the mask and headgear and thereby allow a fast and easy hook up of all sensors and allow measuring standard polysomnographic parameters such as oxygen saturation snoring EEG EOG and body position and movements. Thus the design of all sensors would obviate the hook up of sensors by highly trained sleep technicians while guaranteeing a similar setup of measured signals for assessing sleep disordered breathing. The monitor therefore would allow an easy way for measuring sleep and breathing both in the sleep laboratory setting and outside conventional sleep laboratories.

Third because the apparatus is designed for single use the monitor system is a disposable and a far cheaper way to prevent transmission of infectious material between patients than is cleaning the currently used electrodes and sensors of standard polysomnographic monitor systems. Thus the new breathing monitor guarantees a safe and accurate measurement of sleep disordered breathing for individuals and patients especially in areas to prevent communicable diseases.

Fourth because of its low weight and low dead space long term monitoring of ventilation is now possible. The current technology is too cumbersome for long term measurements as it disturbs breathing through significant increases in dead space and if worn during sleep the sleep architecture. The present invention reduces the weight and dead space to insignificant levels. Thus long term measurements without altering ventilation and sleep are now possible. The flow sensor of this invention is light weight and comfortable during sleep resulting in a high level of patient acceptance both for adults and children and can provide an accurate quantitative air flow measurement comparable to existing pneumotachographs.

The invention may be used for patients too ill or otherwise constrained from attending sleep clinics for care. PSG for such patients in other healthcare environments nursing homes hospitals could be made more affordable and accessible with use of an accurate disposable flow sensor. Home diagnostic use is also possible.

The electronics unit can be re used with no interim maintenance or calibration. To achieve comparable accuracy the pneumotachograph and its metering section must be cleaned and recalibrated between patients. The capital cost maintenance requirements and patient discomfort limit the use of the pneumotachograph to the sleep lab setting and seriously constrain consideration of its use for a portable system.

The differential pressure is measured at the center of the sensor body air passage. This is superior to other measurement positions because it is less susceptible to measurement errors due to fouling of the ports. A previously described flow sensor had a series of ports positioned across the flow stream that effectively average the differential pressure signal theoretically reducing susceptibility to noise due to turbulence. If one port gets partially or fully clogged the differential pressure measurement will be biased towards the remaining open ports. The flow sensor of this invention is not susceptible to this potential problem.

The invention provides a quantitative measurement of ventilation and the severity of upper airway obstruction for use in clinical sleep studies in ambulatory settings and eventually as a home diagnostic system. The development of an accurate comfortable flow sensor for sleep applications can facilitate high throughput clinical and physiological studies that can expand the knowledge in both clinical and translational research. The flow sensor can have an immediate impact on patient monitoring in sleep laboratories and in pulmonary medicine and anesthesia. The flow sensor can form the cornerstone of a home diagnostic system that can greatly increase the diagnosis of sleep disorders. The flow sensor is well suited for this application because it is easy to use comfortable and provides a quantitative measure of air flow that coupled with a pulse oximeter can comprise a complete home diagnostic system.

There is a need for a flow sensor that is both accurate and comfortable to wear during sleep. This invention is critically important for filling this need in the field of adult and pediatric sleep medicine. The invention can also be used in other applications. For example the invention can be used as a monitoring and screening device for subjects susceptible to disturbed breathing. This is particularly important in medical areas such as anesthesia critical care units and medical areas dealing with disorders that affect the cardiopulmonary system and gas exchange.

While the invention has been described in terms of several embodiments it can be apparent to those skilled in the art that various changes can be made to the described embodiments without departing from the scope of the invention as set forth in the following claims.

