---

title: Access control device and electronic device
abstract: An access control device controls an access right with respect to a plurality of electronic devices in a network for each combination of electronic devices. An authority information generating section generates authority information which is used when an electronic device accesses an application on an electronic device. A permission information generating section generates permission information which is information about whether or not the electronic device permits an access request from the electronic device, in relation with the authority information. An access information storing section stores the authority information and the permission information. A transmission control section transmits via the communication section the authority information to the electronic device and the permission information to the electronic device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07752655&OS=07752655&RS=07752655
owner: Panasonic Corporation
number: 07752655
owner_city: Osaka
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20050412
---
The present invention relates to an access control device and an electronic device and more particularly to an access control device which controls an access right with respect to a plurality of electronic devices present in a network for each combination of electronic devices and an electronic device which achieves a desired service in association with an application stored in another electronic device via a network in accordance with a control of the access right by the access control device.

Conventional electronic devices such as a digital TV a mobile telephone and the like are increasingly having a function of downloading a program described in Java language or the like and executing the downloaded program. For example in the field of mobile telephones NTT DoCoMo provides a service called i appli . In the service a mobile telephone terminal downloads a Java program from an application distribution server on the Internet and executes the program on the terminal. In Europe a specification called DVB MHP Digital Video Broadcasting Multimedia Home Platform has been established and a service was already started in conformity with the specification. In digital broadcasting based on the DVB MHP standards a digital TV receives and executes a Java program multiplexed with a broadcast wave.

In such a program distribution service a number of security functions are incorporated so as to prevent unauthorized access of an application to an electronic device. By using the security functions conventional electronic devices prevent unauthorized access from an application created by for example a malicious creator. Specifically conventional electronic devices are provided with for example a function of confirming authentication information given to an application to confirm the identity of a creator of the application a function of controlling API Application Programming Interface for accessing a computer resource available on an electronic device depending on the presence or absence of authentication information or the like.

Patent Document 1 discloses a conventional electronic device having a function of preventing unauthorized access. is a block diagram illustrating an exemplary configuration of the conventional electronic device. In the conventional electronic device comprises computer resources to an application executing section and an access permission control section . The computer resources to are resources which are used by the electronic device so as to achieve a predetermined function. Specifically the computer resources to are a memory resource a resource for achieving connection with respect to an external device and the like. The application executing section downloads an application program via a network from an application server . When the application program is proved not to be an unauthorized program by a third party or the like authentication information is attached to the application program

When the authentication information is attached to the application program the access permission control section permits access of the application program to all the computer resources to . On the other hand when the authentication information is not attached to the application program the access permission control section prohibits access of the application program to all the computer resources to . Thus the conventional electronic device prevents access of unauthorized programs to the computer resources to

In recent applications there are not only an application which achieves a predetermined service using a single electronic device but also an application which achieves a predetermined service in association with a plurality of electronic devices via a network. Examples of an electronic device which executes such an application include a mobile telephone which performs timer recording with respect to a video recorder device a personal computer which shares image data and the like. When executing such an application the conventional electronic device controls access of unauthorized applications to a computer resource for network connection thereby controlling connection to all networks i.e. all devices .

When executing an application which provides a predetermined service in association with another device the conventional electronic device can control access to all networks i.e. all devices however cannot control an access right corresponding to a combination of electronic devices. For example the conventional electronic device cannot perform a control such that a video recorder device A is permitted to perform timer recording while a video recorder device B is not permitted to perform timer recording. In other words when a plurality of devices achieve a predetermined service in association with each other the conventional electronic device cannot control an access right of a combination of devices in accordance with the user s intention.

Therefore an object of the present invention is to provide an access control device which controls an access right with respect to a plurality of electronic devices in a network for each combination of electronic devices and an electronic device which achieves a predetermined service in association with an application stored in another electronic device via a network in accordance with a control of the access control device.

The present invention is directed to an access control device connected via a network to a plurality of electronic devices including a first electronic device and a second electronic device which execute a predetermined application in association with each other. To achieve the above described object the access control device of the present invention comprises an authority information generating section a permission information generating section a communication section a reception control section an access information storing section and a transmission control section.

The authority information generating section generates authority information which is information which defines authority with which the first electronic device requests access to the second electronic device. The permission information generating section generates permission information which is information for determining whether or not the second electronic device gives access permission to the access request based on the authority information from the first electronic device in relation with the authority information. The communication section communicates with the plurality of electronic devices via the network. The reception control section receives a request for generation of the authority information via the communication section from the first electronic device and instructs the authority information generating section to generate the authority information. The access information storing section stores the authority information and the permission information. The transmission control section transmits via the communication section the authority information to the first electronic device and the permission information to the second electronic device.

Preferably the access control device further comprises a policy information storing section and a policy determining section. The policy information storing section stores a policy for determining whether or not generation of the authority information is permitted with respect to the request for generation of the authority information from the first electronic device. The reception control section when receiving the request for generation of the authority information inquires the policy determining section whether or not generation of the authority information is permitted. Only when the policy determining section determines that generation of the authority information is permitted the reception control section instructs the authority information generating section to generate the authority information.

The authority information includes an application secret key generated corresponding to an application executed by the first electronic device and an access list which lists a function of the application given authority for accessing the second electronic device. The permission information includes an application public key generated in a pair with the application secret key and the access list.

Preferably the authority information generating section generates authority information which is signed using a secret key possessed by the authority information generation itself. Also the permission information generating section generates permission information which is signed using a secret key possessed by the permission information generating section itself.

Also the present invention is directed to in a network composed of a plurality of electronic devices and an access control device an electronic device for executing a predetermined application in association with another electronic device. To achieve the above described object the electronic device of the present invention comprises a communication section an authority information receiving section an authority information storing section an application executing section and a control section.

The communication section communicates with the plurality of electronic devices and the access control device via the network. The authority information receiving section receives authority information which is information which defines authority for requesting access to the other electronic device. The authority information storing section stores the authority information received by the authority information receiving section. The application executing section executes the predetermined application to generate a request for access to the other electronic device. The control section controls the request for access to the other electronic device. Preferably the control section requests access to the other electronic device only when it is determined based on the authority information that the access request is given authority.

Preferably the electronic device further comprises an authority information requesting section for requesting the access control device to generate the authority information in accordance with an instruction of the control section. In this case when the authority information corresponding to the other electronic device is not stored in the authority information storing section the control section instructs the authority information requesting section to request generation of the authority information.

The authority information includes an application secret key generated corresponding to the predetermined application and an access list which lists a function of the application given authority for access to the other electronic device. Preferably the control section requests access to the other electronic device only when a function corresponding to the access request generated by the application executing section is included in the access list.

Also the present invention is directed to in a network composed of a plurality of electronic devices and an access control device an electronic device for executing a predetermined application in association with another electronic device. To achieve the above described object the electronic device of the present invention comprises a communication section a permission information receiving section a permission information storing section an application executing section and a control section.

The communication section communicates with the plurality of electronic devices and the access control device via the network. The permission information receiving section receives permission information which is information for determining whether or not access permission is given to an access request from the other electronic device via the communication section from the access control device. The permission information storing section stores the permission information received by the permission information receiving section. The application executing section executes the predetermined application. The control section controls the access request to the application executing section from the other electronic device. The control section determines whether or not the access request from the other electronic device is permitted based on the permission information stored in the permission information.

The permission information includes an application secret key generated corresponding to an application executed by the other electronic device and an access list which lists a function of the application which permits the access request from the other electronic device. Preferably the control section permits the access request from the other electronic device only when a function corresponding to the access request from the other electronic device is included in the access list.

Processes performed by the authority information generating section the permission information generating section the communication section the reception control section the access information storing section and the transmission control section of the access control device can be implemented as an access control method which provides a series of procedures. The access control method of the present invention comprises an authority information generating step a permission information generating step a communicating step a receiving step an instructing step and a transmitting step.

The authority information generating step generates authority information which is information which defines authority with which the first electronic device requests access to the second electronic device. The permission information generating step generates permission information which is information for determining whether or not the second electronic device gives access permission to the access request based on the authority information from the first electronic device in relation with the authority information. The communicating step communicates with the plurality of electronic devices via the network. The receiving step receives a request for generation of the authority information via the communicating step from the first electronic device. The instructing step instructs the authority information generating step to generate the received authority information. The transmitting step transmits the authority information to the first electronic device and the permission information to the second electronic device.

Preferably the access control method is provided in the form of a program for causing an access control device to execute the series of procedures. The program may be stored in a computer readable storage medium.

Processes performed by the communication section the authority information receiving section the authority information storing section the application executing section and the control section can be implemented as in a network composed of a plurality of electronic devices and an access control device a method with which an electronic device for executing a predetermined application in association with another electronic device requests access to the other electronic device.

The access request method of the present invention comprises a communicating step a receiving step an executing step and a requesting step. The communicating step communicates with the plurality of electronic devices and the access control device via the network. The receiving step receives via the communicating step authority information which is information which defines authority for requesting access to the other electronic device. The executing step executes the predetermined application to generate a request for access to the other electronic device. The requesting step requests access to the other electronic device via the communicating step only when it is determined based on the authority information that the access request is given authority.

Preferably the access request method is provided in the form of a program for causing an access control device to execute the series of procedures. The program may be stored in a computer readable storage medium.

Processes performed by the communication section the permission information receiving section the permission information storing section the application executing section and the control section of the electronic device can be implemented as in a network composed of a plurality of electronic devices and an access control device a method with which an electronic device for executing a predetermined application in association with another electronic device determines whether or not to permit an access request from the other electronic device.

The method for determining whether or not to permit an access request comprises a communicating step a receiving step an executing step and a determining step. The communicating step communicates with the plurality of electronic devices and the access control device via the network. The receiving step receives via the communicating step permission information which is information for determining whether or not access permission is given to the access request from the other electronic device. The executing step executes the predetermined application. The determining step determines whether or not the access request from the other electronic device is permitted based on the permission information.

Preferably the method for determining whether or not to permit an access request is provided in the form of a program for causing an access control device to execute the series of procedures. The program may be stored in a computer readable storage medium.

According to the present invention an access control device generates authority information and permission information in relation with each other and transmits the generated authority information to an electronic device which is to do access and the permission information to an electronic device which is to be accessed. Thereby the access control device can control an access right to a plurality of electronic devices present in a network for each combination of electronic devices.

Since an electronic device of the present invention requests access to another electronic device only when given authority according to authority information it is possible to prevent request for access to an electronic device which is not given authority. Also since an electronic device permits access from another electronic device only when permitted according to permission information it is possible to prevent access from an electronic device which is not given permission. Thereby the electronic devices which are given the authority information and the permission information by the access control device can provide a predetermined service in association with each other via a network while preventing unauthorized access.

Hereinafter embodiments of the present invention will be described with reference to the accompanying drawings.

The access control device is a device which controls an access right with respect to the electronic device and the electronic device . Specifically the access control device gives authority information or permission information to the electronic device and the electronic device so as to control the access right with respect to the electronic device and the electronic device . The authority information refers to information which defines an authority for requesting access from an application in which one electronic device is present to the other electronic device. The permission information refers to information for determining whether or not access permission is given to an access request based on authority information from one electronic device by the other electronic device. Hereinafter authority information and permission information are collectively referred to as access information.

The electronic device and the electronic device are electronic devices which achieve a desired service in association with each other. Specifically the electronic device and the electronic device correspond to general electronic devices including a personal computer a digital television a set top box a DVD recorder a BlueRay Disc BD recorder a car navigation terminal a mobile telephone a PDA and the like. It is here assumed that the electronic device is a device which requests access to the electronic device and the electronic device is a device which permits access from the electronic device . For example in order to reference data stored in the electronic device the electronic device requests access to the electronic device using authority information. The electronic device uses permission information corresponding to the authority information to determine whether or not access required by the electronic device is permitted.

Note that the access control device may be implemented as software incorporated in the electronic device or the electronic device . Although the access control device is connected to two electronic devices i.e. the electronic device and the electronic device the access control device may be connected to more than two electronic devices.

The access information storing section stores the above described authority information and permission information. Note that the authority information and the permission information will be described in detail below. The policy information storing section stores policy information for determining whether or not issuance of authority information is permitted with respect to a request for authority information from an electronic device. It is assumed that registration of information into the policy information storing section is performed by an owner of the access control device . Note that the registration may be performed via a network from the electronic device or the electronic device . Note that in such a case the access control device and an electronic device which performs policy registration need to be additionally authenticated using a password a certificate or the like.

The communication section communicates with devices such as the electronic device the electronic device and the like via a network. The communication section performs communication in accordance with a protocol such as TLS Transport Layer Security HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol or the like.

A reception control section receives a request for issuance of authority information via the communication section from the electronic device or the electronic device . The policy determining section determines whether or not the request for issuance of authority information received by the reception control section is permitted based on the policy information stored in the policy information storing section .

The authority information generating section generates authority information based on the determination by the policy determining section . is a diagram illustrating an example of the authority information generated by the authority information generating section . In the authority information includes a secret key signature an application secret key and an access list

The secret key signature refers to the result of signing the application secret key and the access list using a secret key held by the access control device . The application secret key refers to a secret key which is generated corresponding to an application executed by the electronic device . The application secret key is generated in a pair with an application public key described below included in permission information. The access list refers to a list which lists a function to which an access right is given by the authority information.

The access list lists three functions i.e. a function A a function B and a function C. Here the function A the function B and the function C define remote procedure call functions which are used to access the other electronic device. Specifically the function A is a remote procedure call function which is used for example when a mobile telephone requests obtaining of video data from a video server which stores the video data.

Note that the access list may be a list other than remote procedure call functions. For example the access list may be a list of access protocols such as FTP File Transfer Protocol HTTP Hyper Text Transfer Protocol TELNET and the like.

The permission information generating section generates permission information based on the determination of the policy determining section . is a diagram illustrating an example of the permission information generated by the permission information generating section . Referring to the permission information includes a secret key signature an application public key and an access list

The secret key signature refers to the result of signing the application public key and the access list using the secret key possessed by the access control device . The application public key refers to a public key generated corresponding to an application. The application public key is generated in a pair with the application secret key included in the above described authority information.

The access list refers to a list which lists functions to which access is permitted in accordance with the permission information. The access list lists three functions i.e. the function A the function B and the function C as in the access list see included in the authority information.

The transmission control section reads out the authority information and the permission information from the access information storing section and transmits the authority information and the permission information via the communication section to the electronic device and the electronic device . In this case the transmission control section may encrypt the authority information and the permission information before transmission.

Next an operation of the access control device of this embodiment will be described with reference to . is a sequence diagram illustrating an exemplary operation of the access control device when the authority information and the permission information are updated by a manager. Referring to when the manager updates the authority information and the permission information the access control device performs a predetermined process and transmits the updated authority information and permission information to the electronic device and the electronic device . Hereinafter the predetermined process which is performed by the access control device in this case is referred to as a manager update process.

When the policy determining section determines that issuance of authority information is permitted the reception control section instructs the authority information generating section and the permission information generating section to generate authority information and permission information. When instructed by the reception control section to generate authority information the authority information generating section performs an authority information generating process to generate authority information step S . When instructed by the reception control section to generate permission information the permission information generating section performs a permission information generating process to generate permission information step S . The authority information generating process and the permission information generating process will be described in detail below. The generated authority information and permission information are stored in the access information storing section .

When the information stored in the access information storing section is updated the transmission control section specifies destinations for the authority information and the permission information and transmits the authority information and the permission information via the communication section to the respective corresponding electronic devices. Specifically the transmission control section transmits the authority information to the electronic device which is a sender of the authority information request message. The transmission control section also transmits the permission information to the electronic device which is requested for access by the electronic device . In this case the transmission control section may encrypt the authority information and the permission information using a secret key held by an electronic device which is a destination.

On the other hand when the policy determining section determines that issuance of authority information is not permitted the reception control section generates a message that issuance of authority information is refused and transmits the message to the electronic device which requests issuance of authority information step S .

Note that after the policy determining section determines that issuance of authority information is permitted the reception control section may perform an application authenticating process which inquires a third party whether the application transmitting the authority information request message is not an unauthorized program. When the authenticity of the application is not confirmed in the application authenticating process the reception control section transmits to the electronic device a message that issuance of authority information is refused.

The authority information generating section extracts the application secret key from the generated pair of the application public key and the application secret key step S . The authority information generating section generates an access list which is a list which lists entry points which allow access from an application present on the electronic device to other electronic devices step S .

The authority information generating section combines the application secret key and the access list step S . Here the combination indicates that the application secret key and the access list are brought together into the same file. Next the authority information generating section signs the file obtained by combining the application secret key and the access list using the secret key held by the access control device step S . By the above described operation the authority information generating section generates authority information see .

The permission information generating section combines the application public key and the access list obtained from the authority information generating section step S . Here the combination indicates that the application public key and the access list are brought together into the same file. Next the permission information generating section signs the file obtained by combining the application public key and the access list using the secret key held by the access control device step S . By the above described operation the permission information generating section generates permission information see .

Thereby the access control device can permit access to the electronic device holding the permission information only from an application which is given the authority information and is operated on the electronic device thereby making it possible to flexibly control an access right for each application.

Next configurations and operations of the electronic device and the electronic device will be described. is a block diagram illustrating an exemplary configuration of the electronic device according to an embodiment of the present invention. In the electronic device of the present invention comprises an authority information storing section an application executing section a control section an authority information requesting section an authority information receiving section and a communication section .

The authority information storing section stores authority information received from the access control device . The application executing section executes a predetermined application which can be performed in association with another electronic device. For example the application executing section is a virtual Java machine which executes an application described in Java programming language. The control section controls access to or from another electronic device. The authority information requesting section requests authority information from the access control device . The authority information receiving section receives authority information transmitted from the access control device . The communication section communicates with external devices such as the access control device the electronic device and the like via a network.

Operations of the electronic device and the electronic device will be described. It is assumed that the electronic device and the electronic device are already executing an application which provides a desired service in association with each other. Here operations of the electronic device and the electronic device in the case where an application executed by the electronic device requests access to the electronic device will be described.

When authority information is not present in the authority information storing section the control section requests the authority information requesting section to obtain authority information. When requested by the control section to obtain authority information the authority information requesting section generates an authority information request message see which is a message for requesting authority information steps S and S . The authority information requesting section transmits the generated authority information request message via the communication section to the access control device step S .

Next the authority information receiving section receives authority information via the communication section from the access control device step S . When receiving encrypted authority information the authority information receiving section performs a decoding process with respect to the encrypted authority information. The authority information receiving section stores the received authority information into the authority information storing section and also informs the control section of the authority information. The control section uses the received authority information or the authority information stored in the authority information storing section to perform an access control process with respect to the electronic device step S .

The control section ends the process if the access request is not present in the access list. On the other hand when the access request is present in the access list the control section generates an access request message which requests access to the electronic device steps S and S . The control section transmits the generated access request message to request access to the electronic device S .

The control section receives an access request message via the communication section from the electronic device step S . The control section decodes the received access request message using an application public key present in the permission information step S . When failing to decode the access request message the control section ends the process.

On the other hand when being successful in decoding the access request message the control section searches an access list see held in the permission information to check whether or not the access request received from the electronic device is present in the access list step S .

When the access request is not present in the access list the control section ends the process. On the other hand when the access request is present in the access list the control section extracts an access request function and an argument list from the access request message see and executes access to the application executing section step S .

An example in which the access control device the electronic device and the electronic device of the present invention are applied to an application distribution type service will be described. In this applied example the electronic device is assumed to be a device which downloads and executes an application from an application distribution server. The electronic device is assumed to be the application distribution server. In such a case the electronic device can selectively download only an application corresponding to a function permitted by permission information from the electronic device based on authority information generated by the access control device . Thereby the electronic device can avoid downloading an application which includes execution which is not permitted.

Note that the electronic device may further comprise the permission information storing section and the permission information receiving section . Thereby the electronic device can achieve an operation similar to that of the electronic device . The electronic device may further comprise the authority information storing section the authority information requesting section and the authority information receiving section . Thereby the electronic device can achieve an operation similar to that of the electronic device .

Note that the procedures of the access control device the electronic device and the electronic device of the embodiment of the present invention may be implemented by a CPU interpreting and executing predetermined program data which can execute the above described procedures which are stored in a storage device a ROM a RAM a hard disk etc. . In this case the program data may be introduced via a storage medium to the storage device or may be executed directly from the storage medium. Note that the storage medium refers to a semiconductor memory a ROM a RAM a flash memory etc. a magnetic disk memory e.g. a flexible disk a hard disk etc. an optical disc memory e.g. a CD ROM a DVD a BD etc. a memory card or the like. The storage medium has a concept including communication media a telephone line a transmission channel etc. .

As described above the access control device of the present invention generates authority information and permission information in relation with each other and transmits the generated authority information to the electronic device which is to do access and the permission information to the electronic device which is to be accessed. Thereby the access control device can control an access right to a plurality of electronic devices present in a network for each combination of electronic devices.

Since the electronic device of the present invention requests access to the electronic device only when given authority according to authority information it is possible to prevent request for access to an electronic device which is not given authority. Also since the electronic device permits access from the electronic device only when permitted according to permission information it is possible to prevent access from an electronic device which is not given permission. Thereby the electronic device and the electronic device can provide a predetermined service in association with each other via a network while preventing unauthorized access.

The access control device of the present invention is effective for a control of an access right with respect to a plurality of electronic devices present in a network for each combination of electronic devices for example.

