---

title: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) immunization strategies employing conformationally-stabilized, surface-occluded peptides comprising a gp41 2F5 epitope in association with lipid
abstract: This invention relates to novel peptide immunogens that generate an immune response in mammals against HIV gp41, to pharmaceutical compositions that comprise such immunogens, and to methods of treating Immunodeficiency disease, especially HIV infection and AIDS, that employ such pharmaceutical compositions.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08147840&OS=08147840&RS=08147840
owner: The United States of America, as represented by the Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services
number: 08147840
owner_city: Bethesda
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050513
---
This application is a U.S. National Phase of International Application No. PCT US2005 016633 filed May 13 2005 designating the U.S. and published in English on Nov. 24 2005 as WO 2005 111079 which claims a right of priority to U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 570 883 filed May 14 2004 which application is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

This invention is funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease at the National Institutes of Health. The United States Government has certain rights to this invention.

This invention relates to novel peptide immunogens that generate an immune response in mammals against HIV gp41 to pharmaceutical composition that comprise such immunogens and to methods of treating Immunodeficiency disease especially HIV infection and AIDS that employ such pharmaceutical compositions.

The human immunodeficiency virus HIV is a pathogenic retrovirus Varmus H. 1988 R Science 240 1427 1439 Cowley S. 2001 TBOHIV I Lepr Rev. 72 2 212 20 . It is the causative agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome AIDS and related disorders Gallo R. C. et al. 1983 Isolation of human T cell leukemia virus in acquired immune deficiency syndrome AIDS Science 220 4599 865 7 Barre Sinoussi F. et al. IOA T LRFA PARFAIDS AIDS 1983 Science 220 868 870 Gallo R. et al. 1984 FDAIOCR HTLV III FPWAIDS AARFAIDS Science 224 500 503 Teich N. et al. 1984 RNA TV Weiss R. et al. eds. Cold Spring Harbor Press NY pp. 949 956 . HIV acts to compromise the immune system of infected individuals by targeting and infecting the CD4 T lymphocytes that would otherwise be the major proponents of the recipient s cellular immune system response Dalgleish A. et al. 1984 TCD4 T4 AIAECOTRFTAIDS R Nature 312 767 768 Maddon et al. 1986 TT4 GETAIDS VRAND IEITISATB Cell 47 333 348 McDougal J. S. et al. 1986 BOHTLV III LAV TT4 T CBA COT110K VPATT4 M Science 231 382 385 . HIV infection is pandemic and HIV associated diseases represent a major world health problem.

HIV infection is believed to occur through the fusion of viral cell and cell cell membranes. This process is mediated by the gp41 and gp120 HIV env proteins and the cellular CD4 protein. Following binding of gp120 to CD4 a conformational change occurs in the gp120 gp41 complex. This change leads to the insertion of the gp41 protein into the target membrane and ultimately to membrane fusion.

In one aspect the invention relates to an isolated peptide that comprises at least ten contiguous amino acids of the sequence EKNEQELLELDKWASLW SEQ ID NO 1 and that binds to monoclonal antibody 2F5 wherein the isolated peptide is conformationally stabilized to provide a three dimensional structure that corresponds to that of the peptide EKNEQELLELDKWASLW SEQ ID NO 1 when complexed with the 2F5 antibody wherein said isolated peptide comprises a face that does not bind to the 2F5 antibody.

In a further aspect the invention relates to a method of generating an immune response against a gp41 antigen in a mammal comprising administering to the mammal an isolated peptide that comprises at least ten contiguous amino acids of the sequence EKNEQELLELDKWASLW SEQ ID NO 1 and that binds to monoclonal antibody 2F5 wherein the isolated peptide is conformationally stabilized to provide a three dimensional structure that corresponds to that of the peptide EKNEQELLELDKWASLW SEQ ID NO 1 when complexed with the 2F5 antibody wherein said isolated peptide comprises a face that does not bind to the 2F5 antibody of claim .

In a further aspect the invention relates to a method of generating an immune response against a gp41 antigen in a mammal comprising administering to the mammal and expressible genetic construct comprising a a polynucleotide encoding a heterologous leader sequence b a polynucleotide encoding a heterologous hydrophobic polypeptide sequence c a gp41 polynucleotide encoding at least ten contiguous amino acids of the MPR region of gp41 and d a polynucleotide encoding a heterologous transmembrane domain.

In a further aspect the invention relates to an isolated crystal of the Fab monoclonal antibody 2F5 complexed with a peptide having the amino acid sequence EKNEQELLELDKWASLW SEQ ID NO 1 or a functional analog thereof.

As the HIV pandemic continues to infect millions of people each year the need for an effective vaccine increases. The development of such a vaccine has been stymied due to the difficulty in developing an immunogen capable of eliciting broadly neutralizing antibodies. In order to develop such an immunogen a crystallographic investigation of the broadly neutralizing anti HIV 1 antibody 2F5 is undertaken. Antibody 2F5 is discussed by Pai E. et al. 2000 Fab Epitope Complex From The HIV 1 Cross Neutralizing Monoclonal Antibody 2F5 PCT Publication No. WO 00 61618 and by Barbato G. et al. 2003 Structural Analysis Of The Epitope Of The Anti HIV Antibody 2F5 Sheds Light Into Its Mechanism Of Neutralization And HIV Fusion J. Molec. Biol 330 1101 1115 see also Vaccine Research Centerpost doctoral fellow seminar Jun. 3 2003 and Vaccine Research Center retreat seminar Nov. 13 2003 all of which references are herein incorporated by reference.

By solving the crystal structure of 2F5 in complex with a 17 mer gp41 peptide insight is gained into the mechanism of 2F5 mediated neutralization of HIV and thereby into how to design vaccine immunogens to elicit similarly broadly neutralizing antibodies against HIV. The crystal structure has also provided insight into the design of anti HIV 1 therapeutics. Such structural analysis has led to a complete structural model of the membrane proximal region of HIV gp41 which is a region of HIV that is vulnerable not only to 2F5 mediated neutralization but also to 4E10 and Z13 mediated neutralization two additional broadly neutralizing anti HIV antibodies. It has also led to a four part vaccine strategy for eliciting 2F5 like broadly neutralizing anti HIV antibodies. This vaccine strategy includes conformational stabilization of gp41 proper surface occlusion of gp41 membrane context presentation of gp41 and a prime boost strategy to selectively drive the in vivo production of antibodies that can bind to the native envelope spike. Certain concepts of this vaccine strategy can be adapted for use against other regions of HIV or against other viruses and can be used in conjunction with structure based therapeutics as proposed herein

This invention relates to novel immunogens that generate an immune response in mammals against HIV gp41 to pharmaceutical compositions that comprise such immunogens and to methods of treating Immunodeficiency disease especially HIV infection and AIDS that employ such pharmaceutical compositions.

In one embodiment the invention relates to an isolated peptide that binds to monoclonal antibody 2F5 or a fragment thereof and that comprises at least ten contiguous amino acids preferably at least 12 contiguous amino acids more preferably at least 14 contiguous amino acids and most preferably at least 16 contiguous amino acids of the sequence EKNEQELLELDKWASLW SEQ ID NO 1 wherein the isolated peptide is conformationally stabilized to provide a three dimensional structure that corresponds to that of the peptide EKNEQELLELDKWASLW SEQ ID NO 1 when complexed with the 2F5 antibody wherein said isolated peptide comprises a face that does not bind to the 2F5 antibody.

In the present invention isolated refers to material removed from its original environment e.g. the natural environment if it is naturally occurring and thus is altered by the hand of man from its natural state.

An isolated peptide may comprise a portion of a larger molecular complex. For example an isolated peptide may comprise a portion of a larger peptide protein or polypeptide. The isolated peptide may linked to other functional moieties such as for example T cell epitopes. Isolated peptides may also be in a complex with other components such as adjuvants. In a preferred embodiment of the invention isolated peptides are associated with proteoliposomes. Specific examples include the following 1 Link KLH onto the C terminus. 2 Link N C termini to a heterologous T helper motif e.g. PADRE . 3 Link N C termini with a monophospholipid A adjuvant which would be recognized by CD1 like MHC.

In a preferred embodiment of the invention isolated peptides are presented in a membrane context. For example in one embodiment solid phase proteopliposomes PLs or virus like particles may be employed to present conformationally stabilized and surface occluded immunogens. In a preferred embodiment isolated peptides of the invention are associated with a transmembrane component. As used herein a transmembrane component is any molecule that is anchored in the membrane and serves the purpose of localizing the isolated peptides of the invention in juxtaposition to the membrane. Preferably the isolated peptide is juxtaposed to the membrane so that the face of the isolated peptide that does not bind to the 2F5 antibody is located adjacent to the membrane.

In one embodiment of the invention dimers trimers or oligomers or high density displays of the isolated peptides are employed. For example linkage of a His tagged immunogen to a nickel bead could form a high density display of the antigen.

In a preferred embodiment of the invention the face of the isolated peptide that does not bind to the 2F5 antibody is occluded. Occlusion may be accomplished for example using the following methods A Lipid. Occlusion of the non 2F5 bound face of gp41 could be achieved by attaching lipid to this face and then immunizing in the context of membrane. B O linked glycans. These glycans are relatively small and so allow for more precise occlusion of the non 2F5 bound face. Ideally O linked glycans could be attached to non buried residues of the 2F5 epitope Leu660 which would have to be mutated to a serine or threonine for O linked glycosylation or Ser668 which could stay as it is. Other residues of the epitope could be mutated and then O glycosylated in order to more fully occlude the non 2F5 bound face. C . N linked glycans. Though N linked glycans are much larger than O linked ones their size could have the benefit of making occlusion of the non 2F5 bound face of the membrane proximal region more complete with fewer attachments. D Attaching reactive groups to the non 2F5 bound face and then reacting the immunogen with a complementary reactive surface would leave non 2F5 bound face occluded while exposing the 2F5 bound face. Such a scenario could be performed while in complex with 2F5 which would be eluted off in order to ensure proper conformation. E Due to the natural hydrophobicity of the non 2F5 bound face of the membrane proximal region placement on a complementary hydrophobic surface e.g. graphite could be sufficient for occluding the non 2F5 bound face.

In a preferred embodiment of the invention isolated peptides further comprise the 4E10 Z13 epitope i.e. NWFNIT SEQ ID NO 2 .

Isolated peptides of the invention may be conformationally stabilized in any of a number of ways including for example the use of disulfide bonds or lactam bridges. Considerations for conformational stabilization include the following A For constraining Trp670 and Trp678 in the membrane these residues can be replaced with large hydrophobic groups lipids e.g. inositol . This would ensure that the correct face of the helix that containing Trp670 and Trp678 lies along the membrane while the opposite face is exposed. B The transmembrane domain can be replaced with an attached lipid this would be advantageous because it would make the immunogen smaller. C Disulfide bonds or lactam bridges might be employed to stabilize the b turns that are present in the 2F5 bound conformation of gp41 or to stabilize the downstream helix that lies along the face of the membrane. D Reactive groups can be attached to the non 2F5 bound hydrophobic face of the membrane proximal region and then while in complex with 2F5 bind this immunogen to a surface that would react with the attached reactive groups. After elution of 2F5 one could be left with an immunogen that is in the correct 2F5 bound conformation.

The polypeptides of the invention can be prepared in any suitable manner. Such polypeptides include isolated naturally occurring polypeptides recombinantly produced polypeptides synthetically produced polypeptides or polypeptides produced by a combination of these methods. Means for preparing such polypeptides are well understood in the art.

The polypeptides and proteins of the present invention can be composed of amino acids joined to each other by peptide bonds or modified peptide bonds i.e. peptide isoteres and may contain amino acids other than the 20 gene encoded amino acids. The polypeptides may be modified by either natural processes such as posttranslational processing or by chemical modification techniques. Both post translational modifications and chemical modification techniques are well described in the art. Modifications can occur anywhere in a polypeptide including the peptide backbone the amino acid side chains and the amino or carboxyl termini. The same type of modification may be present in the same or varying degrees at several sites in a given polypeptide and a given polypeptide may contain many types of modifications. Polypeptides may be branched for example as a result of ubiquitination and they may be cyclic with or without branching. Cyclic branched and branched cyclic polypeptides may result from posttranslational natural processes or may be made by synthetic methods.

Modifications include acetylation acylation ADP ribosylation amidation covalent attachment of flavin covalent attachment of a heme moiety covalent attachment of a nucleotide or nucleotide derivative covalent attachment of a lipid or lipid derivative covalent attachment of phosphotidylinositol cross linking cyclization disulfide bond formation demethylation formation of covalent cross links formation of cysteine formation of pyroglutamate formylation gamma carboxylation glycosylation GPI anchor formation hydroxylation iodination methylation myristoylation oxidation pegylation proteolytic processing phosphorylation prenylation racemization selenoylation sulfation transfer RNA mediated addition of amino acids to proteins such as arginylation and ubiquitination. See for instance 2nd Ed. T. E. Creighton W. H. Freeman and Company New York 1993 B. C. Johnson Ed. Academic Press New York pgs. 1 12 1983 Seifter et al. 1990182 626 646 Rattan et al. 1992663 48 62 .

The polypeptides of the invention can be prepared in any suitable manner. Such polypeptides include isolated naturally occurring polypeptides recombinantly produced polypeptides synthetically produced polypeptides or polypeptides produced by a combination of these methods. Means for preparing such polypeptides are well understood in the art.

The invention additionally concerns a method of generating an immune response against a gp41 antigen in a mammal by administering to the mammal isolated peptides of the invention.

In one embodiment the invention relates to nucleotide or genetic immunogens that encode at least a portion of the membrane proximal region of a gp41 envelope protein for expression in a membrane context that facilitates presentation of the 2F5 epitope region. Nucleotide immunogens are expressible in human cells and the design of nucleotide immunogens that are expressible i.e. the selection of vectors promoters and other regulatory components for nucleotide expression is within the skill of one in the art. Nucleotide immunogens may comprise either DNA or RNA.

In one embodiment nucleotide immunogens encode an MPR epitope . An MPR epitope as used herein refers to a polypeptide that is at least 22 amino acids preferably at least 24 amino acids more preferably at least 26 amino acids and most preferably at least 28 amino acids in length that is at least 90 preferably 95 more preferably 98 and most preferably 100 homologous to a portion of the extracellular membrane adjacent 28 amino acids of an HIV 1 gp41 protein.

In one embodiment the invention comprises a polynucleotide construct that comprises the following components in 5 to 3 order 

a gp41 polynucleotide encoding at least ten preferably at least 15 preferably at least 20 contiguous amino acids of the MPR region of gp41 and

Heterologous as used herein refers to components that are heterologous to the gp41 protein components may or may not be heterologous to each other.

In one embodiment the invention comprises a human cell expressible polynucleotide construct that comprises the following components in 5 to 3 order 

In one embodiment the invention comprises a human cell expressible polynucleotide construct comprising a polynucleotide that encodes a transmembrane framework protein comprising an MPR epitope in close proximity to the transmembrane domain.

The MPR epitope is preferably within 10 more preferably within 5 and most preferably within 3 amino acids of the transmembrane domain.

In a preferred embodiment the gp41 polynucleotide encodes a polypeptide comprising the following sequence NEQELLELDKWASLWNWFNITNWLWYIK SEQ ID NO 20 .

In one embodiment the invention comprises a human cell expressible polynucleotide construct comprising a polynucleotide that encodes a transmembrane framework protein comprising an inserted MPR epitope located 5 prime of and in close proximity to the transmembrane domain. A transmembrane framework protein refers a protein that comprises a transmembrane domain that anchors the protein in the membrane protein. Transmembrane framework proteins may be derived from naturally occurring proteins or artificially designed.

Preferred transmembrane framework proteins for use in conjunction with the invention include the following potassium channel protein secYE beta protein conducting channel proteins photosynthetic reaction center cytochrome bc1 complex 1QCR protein bacterial rhodopsin protein beta barrel membrane proteins.

Elicitation of 2F5 like antibodies with the immunogens presented above could be enhanced with prime boost strategies. For example priming with a conformationally stabilized surface occluded membrane anchored immunogen may elicit high titers of antibodies only a small portion of which recognize virus. A boost on the other hand composed of the complete wild type envelope ectodomain and presented in a membrane anchored context should then selectively drive the in vivo production of antibodies capable of binding wild type virus. Conversely one could also prime with the complete envelope ectodomain and then boost with the smaller more accessible immunogen. Listed below are four example candidates that may be employed in a prime boost strategy 1 Prime or boost with gp160 PLs. 2 Prime or boost with Adeno presented HIV 1 envelope glycoproteins. 3 Prime or boost with HIV 2 SIV envelope glycoproteins modified to posses the 2F5 and 4E10 epitopes. 4 Prime or boost with variant HIV 1 envelopes.

The crystal structure shows that the N terminus of the 2F5 light chain interacts with the gp41 epitope. Therefore any effective single chain FV would preferably have the light chain at the N terminus and the heavy chain at the C terminus. Use of the 2F5 scFV may be valid as a therapeutic or could have wide range use in numerous experimental settings for the further elucidation of the mechanism 2F5 mediated neutralization of HIV 1.

Mutagenesis of the 2F5 single chain FV in order to make it more potently neutralizing. Mutations would aim to either increase 2F5 s affinity for its epitope or would aim to increase 2F5 s affinity for membrane by making certain residues more hydrophobic. Examples of mutations either alone or in combination of the 2F5 CDR H3 in order to increase epitope affinity include the following 1 T99 mutated to a Phe. 2 A100g mutated to an Ile. 3 T99 to Phe and A100g to Ile. Mutations either alone or in combination of the 2F5 CDR H3 in order to increase membrane affinity include the following 1 L100aW 2 V100dF 3 1100fW. Mutagenesis presented above could also be performed in the context of the 2F5 Fab or IgG.

The present invention also pertains to the use of a computer system to provide a representation of the binding of peptides and synthetic peptides to antibodies that recognize gp41 epitopes. As used herein the term computer system encompasses a data input means a data storage means a data retrieval means and a data processing means. Most preferably the computer system will additionally contain one or more output devices such as a monitor printer etc. In a preferred embodiment the input means of the computer system will have the capacity to manipulate the representation such as by focusing zooming positioning rotating shrinking expanding color coding etc. features of interest identified either by the computer system or by the user.

As used herein the term representation as applied to three dimensional molecular structure is intended to encompass pictorial digital as well as analog representations. Examples of pictorial representations include printed or video imaged atoms molecules or supra atomic representations.

The invention further concerns a computer system comprising data and a data processor wherein the system forms a representation of the three dimensional structure of the peptide EKNEQELLELDKISLW SEQ ID NO 1 wherein said computer system optionally permits users to model representations of peptides and synthetic peptides for those having similar three dimensional structures.

The invention further concerns a computer system comprising data and a data processor wherein the system forms a representation of the three dimensional structure of the binding site of the Fab monoclonal antibody 2F5 that binds to the peptide EKNEQELLELDKISLW SEQ ID NO 1 wherein said computer system optionally permits users to model representations of peptides and synthetic peptides for those having the ability to bind to such binding site.

In one aspect the invention concerns an isolated crystal of the Fab monoclonal antibody 2F5 complexed with a peptide having the amino acid sequence EKNEQELLELDKISLW SEQ ID NO 1 or a functional analog thereof.

Human monoclonal antibody 2F5 is produced by recombinant expression in Chinese hamster ovary cells Kunert et al. 2000 Stable recombinant expression of the anti HIV 1 monoclonal antibody 2F5 after IgG3 IgG1 subclass switch in CHO cells 67 97 103 . The 2F5 antigen binding fragment Fab is prepared by reducing 2F5 immunoglobulin G IgG 13 mg ml in 100 mM dithiothreitol 1 h 37 C. alkylating in 2 mM iodoacetamide 48 h 4 C. and then cleaving with endoproteinase Lys C 0.01 g l Roche Applied Sciences in 25 mM Tris Cl and 1 mM EDTA pH 8.5 for 4 h at 37 C. The cleavage reaction is stopped with 1 mM TLCK Na p tosyl L lysine chloromethyl ketone and 0.4 mM leupeptin and the cleavage products are passed over a protein A Sepharose column Sigma . Flow through fractions are collected and subjected to cation exchange chromatography Mono S HR 5 5 Pharmacia Amersham Biosciences with a gradient ranging from 0 to 0.5 M NaCl in 50 mM Na acetate pH 5.0. Peak fractions are combined and further purified by size exclusion chromatography Superdex 200 HiLoad 26 60 Pharmacia Amersham Biosciences in gel filtration buffer 350 mM NaCl 2.5 mM Tris SO pH 7.1 0.02 NaN .

The peptides gp41 ELDKIS SEQ ID NO 3 gp41 ELLELDKISLWN SEQ ID NO 4 and P41 NEQELLELDKISLWNWFD SEQ ID NO 5 and N terminally acetylated and C terminally amidated peptides gp41 ac LELDKISL n SEQ ID NO 6 gp41 ac LLELDKISLW n SEQ ID NO 7 and gp41 ac EKNEQELLELDKISLW n SEQ ID NO 1 are obtained through the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases NIAID peptide facility J. Lukszo Princeton Biomolecules and American Peptide . Each lyophilized peptide is resuspended in 30 acetonitrile combined with purified 2F5 Fab to a molar ratio of 3 1 placed in 0.5 gel filtration buffer gel filtration buffer diluted 50 with water and concentrated with a Centricon 10 instrument Amicon to between 5 and 10 mg ml.

All crystals are grown by hanging drop vapor diffusion. Crystallization droplets are set up with 0.5 l of protein in 0.5 gel filtration buffer and 0.35 l of reservoir solution. Crystals of 2F5 complexed with 13 mer are grown with a reservoir solution of Hampton Crystal Screen reagent 18 composed of 0.2 M Mg acetate 0.1 M Na cacodylate pH 6.5 and 20 polyethylene glycol 8000 PEG 8000 . Crystals of 2F5 Fab complexed with 7 mer 1 mer or 17 mer are grown with a reservoir solution composed primarily of Hampton Crystal Screen reagent 40. Microseeding Stura and Wilson 1991 Applications of the streak seeding technique in protein crystallization 110 270 282 and slight alterations in the concentration of the reservoir salt enhanced crystallization and increased reproducibility. For example with the 2F5 Fab 17 mer complex the reservoir solution is composed of 20 PEG 4000 20 isopropanol and 125 mM Na citrate pH 5.6 . After crystallization droplets are set up additional NaCl is added to the reservoir to bring the final reservoir NaCl concentration to 100 mM and crystals are obtained by heterologous cross seeding with crystals of the 2F5 11 mer complex.

Before data are collected at 100 K crystals are placed for a few minutes in a stabilizing cryoprotectant solution composed of the reservoir solution supplemented with PEG 4000 and ethylene glycol to final concentrations of 30 each. Flash cooling is aided by Paratone N Kwong and Yee 1999 Use of cryoprotectants in combination with immiscible oils for flash cooling macromolecular crystals 32 102 105 . X ray data are collected with 1.000 radiation at the Advanced Photon Source SER CAT beamline 22 Argonne National Laboratory. Data are processed with HKL2000 Otwinowski and Minor 1997 Processing of X ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode 276 307 326 .

The structure of the 2F5 gp417 mer complex is solved by using molecular replacement with the program AmoRe as implemented in the CCP4 package Collaborative Computational Project 1994 The CCP4 suite programs for protein crystallography 50 760 763 . Molecular replacement searches with 10 to 4 data are carried out by using Fab molecules with a variety of different elbow angles until one PDB accession code 1RZG Huang et al. 2004 Structural basis of tyrosine sulfation and VH gene usage in antibodies that recognize the HIV 1 coreceptor binding site on gp120 101 2706 2711 gave a highly significant translation peak. CNS Brunger et al. 1998 Crystallography NMR system a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination 54 905 921 is used for structure refinement employing simulated torsion angle annealing standard positional minimization automated water picking and deletion low resolution solvent modeling and individual restrained isotropic B value refinement all aided by interactive model rebuilding in 0 Jones et al. 1991 Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models 47 110 119 and geometric analysis with Procheck Laskowski et al. 1993 PROCHECK a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures 26 283 291 as implemented in CCP4 Collaborative Computational Project 1994 The CCP4 suite programs for protein crystallography 50 760 763 . The 2F5 gp4111 mer and 2F5 gp4117 mer complexes are virtually isomorphous to the 7 mer complex and could be solved by rigid body refinement. Refinements for the 2F5 11 mer and 2F5 17 mer complexes are carried out as described for the 7 mer.

The published amino acid sequence of 2F5 Bryson et al. 2001 Cross neutralizing human monoclonal anti HIV 1 antibody 2F5 preparation and crystallographic analysis of the free and epitope complexed forms of its Fab fragment 8 413 418 Kunert et al. 1998 Molecular characterization of five neutralizing anti HIV type 1 antibodies identification of nonconventional D segments in the human monoclonal antibodies 2G12 and 2F514 1115 1128 Pai et al. April 2000 Fab epitope complex from the HIV 1 cross neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F5 World Intellectual Property Organization patent WO 00 61618. is confirmed by mass spectroscopy of trypsin digested 2F5 fragments which had been purified by reverse phase chromatography. Peptides with masses that did not agree with the published sequence are characterized by Edman sequencing. In the light chain one tryptic peptide had an anomalous mass of 1 798.01 Da. This peptide is isolated by high pressure liquid chromatography and sequenced as SGTASVVCLLNNFYPR SEQ ID NO 8 producing a calculated mass of 1 798.038 Da. It differed from the published sequence SGTASWCLLNNFYPR SEQ ID NO 9 by the substitution of two Val residues for one Trp residue. In the heavy chain one tryptic peptide had a mass difference being 30 Da heavier than the published sequence. Edman sequencing produced a sequence GPVNAMDVWGQITVTISSTSTK SEQ ID NO 10 which contained an Ala to Thr change accounting for the observed mass difference.

A codon optimized construct of the JRFL gp160 envelope glycoprotein is obtained from the AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program Division of AIDS NIAID National Institutes of Health NIH . To generate JRFL gp145 cleavage minus C9 tagged protein the plasmid is first modified to encode cleavage mutants by replacing two Arg residues at the gp120 gp41 cleavage junction with Ser residues REKR SEQ ID NO 11 to SEKS SEQ ID NO 12 at positions 508 and 511 . Next the cleavage minus mutant along with the entire transmembrane domain the first five residues of the cytoplasmic tail and a C9 tag TETSQVAPA SEQ ID NO 13 are cloned into the CMV R vector Yang et al. 2004 pH dependent entry of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus is mediated by the spike glycoprotein and enhanced by dendritic cell transfer through DC SIGN 78 5642 5650 . QuikChange Stratagene is used to create expression plasmids encoding variants of the 2F54E10 membrane proximal region 

Expression plasmids are transfected into 293 cells by the calcium phosphate method Invitrogen . Forty eight hours after transfection cells are harvested at 4 C. with phosphate buffered saline PBS containing 5 mM EDTA washed once with PBS without EDTA and then used for production of envelope glycoprotein proteoliposomes EnvPLs as previously described Babcock et al. 200 Ligand binding characteristics of CXCR4 incorporated into paramagnetic proteoliposomes 276 38433 38440 Grundner et al. 2002 Solid phase proteoliposomes containing human immunodeficiency virus envelope glycoproteins 76 3511 3521 . CHAPSO is used for lysis and 10 glycerol is used in the dialysis buffer. The lipids used are 1 palmitoyl 2 oleoyl sn glycero 3 phosphocholine 1 palmitoyl 2 oleoyl sn glycero 3 phosphoethanolamine and 1 2 dioleoyl sn glycero 3 phosphate Avanti Polar at a molar ratio of 6 3 1. The presence of the reconstituted lipid membrane is confirmed by staining with R phycoerythrin streptavidin Caltag and fluorescence activated flow cytometry. To produce EnvPLs without lipid membrane EnvPLs are washed extensively with the detergent CHAPSO and then with PBS.

Anti HA antibody sc 7392 Santa Cruz antibody b12 D. Burton and the broadly neutralizing gp41 antibodies 2F5 and 4E10 H. Katinger are conjugated with phycoerythrin M. Roederer http www.drmr.com abcon Roederer et al. 1997 8 color 10 parameter flow cytometry to elucidate complex leukocyte heterogeneity 29 328 339 . Proteoliposomes PLs 106 beads are separately stained with each of the four phycoerythrin conjugated antibodies at concentrations ranging from 2 to 200 g ml in a final volume of 100 l of flow cytometry buffer PBS containing 3 fetal bovine serum and 0.02 NaN . All PLs are incubated for 20 min at 4 C. washed twice with flow cytometry buffer and then analyzed with a FACScan flow cytometer with CellQuest software Becton Dickinson .

Virus neutralization data are derived by using CD4 T cells as target cells and flow cytometry to enumerate the number of infected cells after a single round of virus infection Mascola et al. 2002 Human immunodeficiency virus type I neutralization measured by flow cytometric quantitation of single round infection of primary human T cells 76 4810 4821 . Briefly 40 l of virus stock is incubated with 10 l of antibody. After incubation for 30 min at 37 C. 20 l of mitogen stimulated CD4 T cells 1.5 10cells is added to each well. The multiplicity of infection is approximately 0.1. Cells are maintained in interleukin 2 culture medium containing 1 M indinavir and are fed on day 1 with 150 l of interleukin 2 culture medium. On day 2 after infection cells are stained for intracellular p24 antigen by using the Beckman Coulter KC57 anti p24 antibody followed by quantification of HIV 1 infected cells by flow cytometry. The percentage of neutralization is defined as the reduction in the number of p24 positive cells in antibody containing wells compared with the number in wells incubated with mock antibody. Virus isolate JRFL is obtained from the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program Division of AIDS NIAID NIH.

Structural comparisons are made with the CCP4 program lsqkab Collaborative Computational Project 1994 The CCP4 suite programs for protein crystallography 50 760 763 . Interactive surfaces are analyzed with MS Connolly 1983 Analytical molecular surface calculation 16 548 558 HBPLUS McDonald and Thornton 1994 Satisfying hydrogen bonding potential in proteins 238 777 793 and Grasp Nicholls et al. 1991 Protein folding and association insights from the interfacial and thermodynamic properties of hydrocarbons 11 281 296 . Figures are made with Grasp Nicholls et al. 1991 Protein folding and association insights from the interfacial and thermodynamic properties of hydrocarbons 11 281 296 XtalView McRee 1999 XtalView Xfit a versatile program for manipulating atomic coordinates and electron density 125 156 165 and Raster3D Merritt and Bacon 1997 Macromolecular crystallography 277 505 524 .

Coordinates for 2F5 complexed to 7 mer 11 mer and 17 mer gp41 peptides have been deposited with the Protein Data Bank under PDB accession codes 1TJG 1TJH and 1TJI respectively.

To obtain a structure of 2F5 with its complete gp41 epitope we adopted an iterative crystallization procedure that allowed us to extend stepwise from the core epitope to encompass the entire 2F5 epitope. We began by trying to reproduce the published 2F5 crystals Bryson et al. 2001 Cross neutralizing human monoclonal anti HIV 1 antibody 2F5 preparation and crystallographic analysis of the free and epitope complexed forms of its Fab fragment 8 413 418 both alone or in complex with a 7 mer peptide. Perhaps because our 2F5 contained slightly different C termini produced by endoproteinase Lys C digestion of alkylated and reduced IgG as opposed to natural digestion we are unable to reproduce the previous crystals. We used the Hampton Crystal Screen to find alternative crystallization conditions. We are able to grow needles with Hampton Crystal Screen reagent 13 PEG 400 and to grow diamond plates with reagent 40 PEG 4000 and isopropanol . The needles did not diffract whereas the diamond plates diffracted to Bragg spacings of better than 2 and turned out to have a lattice similar to that described by Bryson et al. Bryson et al. 2001 Cross neutralizing human monoclonal anti HIV 1 antibody 2F5 preparation and crystallographic analysis of the free and epitope complexed forms of its Fab fragment 8 413 418 for their 2F5 7 mer complex. Structure solution and refinement yielded an Rof 19.87 and an Rof 22.58 Table 1 . Similar screening is carried out with peptides extending from the core 7 mer an additional three residues on either flank gp41 13 mer and an additional six residues on either flank gp41 19 mer . No crystals are obtained with the 2F5 19 mer complex. Screening with the 2F5 13 mer complex produced crystals with Hampton Crystal Screen reagent 18 PEG 8000 . These crystals are small needles with 622 Laue symmetry and diffracted to only 4 .

To overcome the sensitivity of complex crystallization to extensions on the core peptide we proceeded in smaller steps. We extended the 7 mer peptide by one residue on either flank gp41 669 9 mer or by two residues gp41 11 mer and tested the 2F5 complexes for crystallization. Diamond plates of the 2F5 11 mer complex could be grown from Hampton Crystal Screen reagent 40 and seeding with the 2F5 7 mer crystals. These 2F5 11 mer crystals diffracted to 2.1 and structure solution and refinement yielded an Rof 20.05 and an Rof 23.33 Table 1 . Analysis of the 2F5 11 mer structure showed lattice interactions at the 11 mer C terminus but room to accommodate a longer N terminus. We exploited this information with a 17 mer gp41 which added six residues to the N terminus but left the C terminus intact. This 17 mer encompasses the entire 2F5 epitope as defined by phage display and protease protection Parker et al. 2001 Fine definition of the epitope on the gp41 glycoprotein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 for the neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F575 10906 10911 Zwick et al. 2001 Broadly neutralizing antibodies targeted to the membrane proximal external region of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 glycoprotein gp4175 10892 10905 with additional N terminal residues.

Crystallization of the 2F5 17 mer complex produced diamond shaped crystals with Hampton Crystal Screen reagent 40 after cross seeding with the 2F5 11 mer crystals. These crystals diffracted to 2.2 and are virtually isomorphous with both the 2F5 7 mer and 2F5 11 mer crystals. Structure solution and refinement of the 2F5 17 mer yielded an Rof 18.12 and an Rof 22.22 Table 1 with root mean square deviations RMSDs from ideality on bonds of 0.0058 and 87.6 of the residues in the most favored Ramachandran angles. The two Ramachandran outliers AlaL51 and ThrL30 are typically observed as such in antibodies and occur in well ordered turns. These outliers are also observed in both the 2F5 7 mer and 2F5 11 mer complexes. Because the 7 mer peptide gp41 ac EKNEQELLELDKISLW n SEQ ID NO 1 encompassed both the shorter 7 mer and 11 mer peptides we placed it at the focus of our structural analysis.

The overall structure of the 2F5 Fab complexed to a 17 mer gp41 epitope is shown in . Main chain electron density is observed for all 451 residues of the Fab. Density for the heavy chain extended to Lys Kabat IgG numbering in the hinge region the predicted cleavage site of the endoproteinase Lys C used in the Fab preparation. Density for the light chain extended all the way to Cys the final light chain residue. Because reduction and alkylation are performed on the interchain disulfides during preparation of the Fab Cysof the light chain and also CysH216 of the heavy chain are modified by acetamide groups and these chemical modifications could be observed in the electron density. All six complementarity determining region CDR loops are well ordered with an average B factor of 26.4 slightly lower than the average B factor of 31.3 for the entire Fab. Residue Glyof the 2F5 CDR H3 loop makes a hydrophobic lattice contact with Argof a symmetry mate while peptide contacts at the base of the CDR H3 appear to be predominantly responsible for ordering the loop which is disordered when not bound to the epitope Bryson et al. 2001 Cross neutralizing human monoclonal anti HIV 1 antibody 2F5 preparation and crystallographic analysis of the free and epitope complexed forms of its Fab fragment 8 413 418 Pai et al. April 2000 Fab epitope complex from the HIV 1 cross neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F5 World Intellectual Property Organization patent WO 00 61618 . The relative orientation elbow angle between the variable and constant domains is 150.3 .

Because we pursued a strategy to visualize the entire 2F5 epitope the peptide is extended until the N terminus is no longer constrained by interaction with 2F5. Thus in contrast to the entirely ordered Fab the first three residues of the gp41 peptide Glu Lys and Asn could not be discerned while the next two residues Gluand Gln are marginally ordered. Starting at Glu the electron density improved and from Leuall the way to the C terminus of the peptide at Trp the structure is clearly defined Panel C . This improvement in order is reflected in the B factors with Gluand Glnexhibiting an average B factor of 120.20 while residues Gluto Trphad an average B factor of 35.39 similar to the average B value of the Fab.

The gp41peptide perches in relatively extended conformation at the CDR junction between the heavy and light chains . The peptide spans roughly 25 from the C of residue Gluto the C of Trp while the maximal side chain distance extends over 30 . Progressing from the N terminus the peptide makes tenuous contact with the CDR L1 bends roughly 90 while passing over and contacting the N terminus of the light chain and then proceeds in a roughly linear manner 15 past the CDR L3 and H2 with the final seven residues contacting the 22 amino acid long CDR H3. The overall extended conformation of the peptide is reflected in its generally B type Ramachandran angles. Because the peptide N terminus is poorly ordered Panel C it may adopt an alternative conformation in the context of the rest of the envelope ectodomain. Nonetheless it is noted that the initial bend occurs at a modified gamma like turn. The carbonyl oxygen of Glnis outside hydrogen bonding distance 4.9 from the backbone amide of Leu still this bend in the peptide allows hydrophobic interactions to occur between the side chains of Gluand Leu. Within the 14 ordered residues of the peptide other than the modified gamma like turn only two other turns are observed both of which are type 1 turns one between residues Aspand Alaand the other between residues Trpand Leu. These overlapping turns reverse directional changes roughly canceling each other so that the overall path of the peptide remains essentially straight . Only three intrapeptide hydrogen bonds occur one between the backbone amide of Trpand the side chain carboxylic acid of Asp one between the backbone amide of Alaand the carbonyl oxygen of Asp and one between the backbone amide of Leuand the carbonyl oxygen of Trp. These intrapeptide hydrogen bonds constrain the conformations of only six residues residues 664 to 669 suggesting that when excised from the rest of the HIV 1 ectodomain the conformation of a free gp41 peptide would not be strongly constrained into the conformation recognized by 2F5.

The overall surface area of 2F5 that is buried by gp41 in the structure is 634.7 an increase of more than 50 over the area buried by the 7 mer core epitope 418.8 is buried in the 2F5 7 mer structure . Conversely the surface area on gp41 that is buried in the interaction with 2F5 is 563.4 versus 377.7 A2 in the 2F5 7 mer structure . This falls into the range that is typical for protein antibody interactions Davies and Cohen 1996 Interactions of protein antigens with antibodies 93 7 12 . When analyzed according to the chemical nature of the interaction 43.6 of the interactive surface on the peptide involves nonhydrophobic residues 28.8 acidic 11.3 basic and 3.5 polar. Similarly many of the residues on the antibody that are buried by gp41 are polar or charged with 30.7 of the interactive surface contributed by polar residues 27.6 by basic residues and 4.8 by acidic residues with the remaining 36.8 contributed by hydrophobic residues Table 2 . When the surfaces of the antibody and the gp41 peptide are colored by electrostatic potential Panel A and Panel E their comparison reveals a general complementarity of charge throughout the contact interface.

All of the residues of the gp41 peptide between Glnand Trp with the exception of Leuand Ser interact directly with the antibody either through hydrogen bonds and salt bridges or through hydrophobic interactions Tables 2 and 3 . These interactions confirm phage display protease protection and peptide affinity assays Barbato et al. 2003 Structural analysis of the epitope of the anti HIV antibody 2F5 sheds light into its mechanism of neutralization and HIV fusion 330 1101 1115 Parker et al. 2001 Fine definition of the epitope on the gp41 glycoprotein of human immunodeficiency virus type I for the neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F575 10906 10911 Tian et al. 2002 Structure affinity relationships in the gp41 ELDKWA SEQ ID NO 19 epitope for the HIV 1 neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F5 effects of side chain and backbone modifications and conformational constraints 59 264 276 Zwick et al. 2001 Broadly neutralizing antibodies targeted to the membrane proximal external region of human immunodeficiency virus type I glycoprotein gp4175 10892 10905 which show that the 2F5 epitope is larger than the originally defined core heptapeptide. At the peptide N terminus the contacts for the relatively disordered Gluand Glnare tenuous but beginning at Glu the contact surface becomes well defined in concordance with peptide affinity assays which show that the presence of Gluenhances the affinity of 2F5 by six fold Barbato et al. 2003 Structural analysis of the epitope of the anti HIV antibody 2F5 sheds light into its mechanism of neutralization and HIV fusion 330 1101 1115 . Unexpectedly the contact interface between 2F5 and gp41 includes residues not only within the variable CDRs of 2F5 but also within nonpolymorphic regions namely residues of the N terminus of the light chain. A salt bridge is observed between the side chain carboxylic acid of Gluand the positively charged light chain amino terminus while hydrophobic contacts are observed between the side chain of Leuand Alaand Leu. These interactions confirm results of binding studies which show that alteration of the 2F5 light chain N terminus can ablate 2F5 s interaction with gp41 M. Zwick personal communication as well as peptide affinity assays which show that extension of the core peptide to Gluenhances 2F5 affinity Barbato et al. 2003 Structural analysis of the epitope of the anti HIV antibody 2F5 sheds light into its mechanism of neutralization and HIV fusion 330 1101 1115 . Leu which is also critical for optimal 2F5 binding Tian et al. 2002 Structure affinity relationships in the gp41 ELDKWA SEQ ID NO 19 epitope for the HIV 1 neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F5 effects of side chain and backbone modifications and conformational constraints 59 264 276 not only forms interactions with the nonpolymorphic N terminus of the 2F5 light chain but also forms a hydrophobic contact with the side chain of CDR L3 Phe.

Proceeding further from the peptide N terminus the gp41 residues Asp Lys and Trp which lie at the core of the 2F5 epitope and have been shown to be essential for 2F5 binding Conley et al. 1994 Neutralization of divergent human immunodeficiency virus type I variants and primary isolates by IAM 41 2F5 an anti gp41 human monoclonal antibody 91 3348 3352 Muster et al. 1993 A conserved neutralizing epitope on gp41 of human immunodeficiency virus type 167 6642 6647 Purtscher et al. 1996 Restricted antigenic variability of the epitope recognized by the neutralizing gp41 antibody 2F510 587 593 account for over 40 of the surface area that is buried by 2F5 and for almost half of the hydrogen bonds between gp41 and 2F5 Tables 2 and 3 . The side chain of Asp64 makes hydrogen bonds with the guanidinium atoms of CDR H3 Argand the imidazole side chain of CDR L3 His while the backbone amide of Asp64 hydrogen bonds with the carbonyl oxygen of CDR L3 His. These polar interactions are enhanced by hydrophobic interactions between the CB of Aspand the main chain of CDR L3His as well as between the main chain carbons of Asp64 and the aromatic ring of CDR L3 Tyr Panel B . Lysmakes hydrogen bonds through its backbone amide and the ring hydroxyl of Tyr as well as between its side chain amine and the carboxylic acids of CDR H2 Aspand Asp. The aliphatic base of Lysis stabilized by packing against the aromatic ring of CDR H2 Tyr Panel B . Residue Trp out of all of the gp41 residues makes the most extensive interactions with 2F5 in terms of buried surface area Table 2 . Its ring carbons make hydrophobic contacts with CDR H1 Gly as well as CDR H3 Arg Pro and Val. Taken together these interactions confirm not only why mutation of these three core gp41 residues ablates 2F5 binding but also why mutations in 2F5 residues His Tyr and Phe affect binding Zwick et al. 2004 The long third complementarity determining region of the heavy chain is important in the activity of the broadly neutralizing anti human immunodeficiency virus type 1 antibody 2F578 3155 3161 .

Proceeding further along gp41 toward the 2F5 epitope C terminus the remaining contacts are made predominantly with the CDR H3 although only with nonapical residues. The side chain of gpLeu669 interacts with CDR H3 Pro confirming its importance for 2F5 binding Tian et al. 2002 Structure affinity relationships in the gp41 ELDKWA epitope for the HIV 1 neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F5 effects of side chain and backbone modifications and conformational constraints 59 264 276 while the carbonyl oxygen of Trp670 hydrogen bonds with the backbone amide of Arg. It is rather surprising that out of the 22 amino acids of the 2F5 CDR H3 only 10 show any interaction with gp41 Table 2 leaving open the possibility that the 2F5 CDR H3 may have functions outside the realm of direct gp41 binding see below .

In general antibodies that bind to peptides envelop them whereas antibodies that bind to protein surfaces have much flatter surfaces of interaction Collis et al. 2003 Analysis of the antigen combining site correlations between length and sequence composition of the hypervariable loops and the nature of the antigen 325 337 354 . In the case of 2F5 out of a total accessible surface area of 1 377 on the peptide 638.7 for the core epitope from position 661 to 670 a surface of only 563.4 377.7 for the core is actually buried by the interaction with 2F5 Panels A to C . Thus only 41 59 for the core of the gp41 epitope is buried by 2F5. Instead of enveloping the antigen 2F5 only binds the gp41 peptide on one exclusive face Panels A to C . This mode of interaction is suggestive of an antibody protein interface in which a non 2F5 bound hidden face is occluded by other portions of the envelope ectodomain.

In order to further address the characteristics of the gp41 peptide surface that is bound by 2F5 as well as the one that is perhaps occluded from 2F5 binding we analyzed the electrostatic potentials of these surfaces. As shown in Panels D and E only the 2F5 bound face of gp41 is charged Panel E while the face that is hidden or occluded from 2F5 binding is much more hydrophobic Panel D . The hydrophobicity of this surface provides further support for the possibility that this face of gp41 may be involved in protein contacts which may occlude it from recognition by 2F5. Because antibodies against the hidden hydrophobic face may be preferentially selected due to favorable binding energies at hydrophobic surfaces this may explain in part why immunizations with non occluded peptides have thus far failed to elicit 2F5 like antibodies.

In a survey of human antibodies the mean length of the CDR H3 loops of antibodies directed against viral antigens is 16.5 residues which is longer than those of antibodies directed against any other class of antigen Collis et al. 2003 Analysis of the antigen combining site correlations between length and sequence composition of the hypervariable loops and the nature of the antigen 325 337 354 . The selection bias for these long loops is not entirely clear but broadly neutralizing anti HIV 1 antibodies follow this trend as well with the CDR H3 loop of 2F5 extending 22 amino acids in length. From analysis of the 2F5 17 mer structure it is clear that the interactions between the CDR H3 loop of 2F5 and gp41 occur predominantly at the base of the CDR H3 while the rest of the residues of the CDR H3 namely at the apex remain largely unbound to gp41.

Analysis of the 2F5 CDR H3 loop shows that the apex of the loop which does not contact gp41 contains a stretch of hydrophobic amino acids namely Leu Phe Val and Ile Panel A . Interestingly the side chains of these residues all face in the same general direction and define a protruding flat hydrophobic surface Panel B . In some ways the 2F5 CDR H3 resembles the structure of a foot with the sole of the foot defining a hydrophobic plane.

It has been suggested that D3 3 is the D H genomic precursor of this region of 2F5 Kunert et al. 1998 Molecular characterization of five neutralizing anti HIV type 1 antibodies identification of nonconventional D segments in the human monoclonal antibodies 2G12 and 2F514 1115 1128 in that 13 out of 2F5 CDR H3 nucleotides match with D3 3. If D3 3 is the genomic precursor of this region then three of the hydrophobic sole residues i.e. Phe Val and Ile would be directly encoded by this D segment. The interspersing proline Prowould change during affinity maturation from a D3 3 encoded valine. While valine is compatible with the sole structure proline with its confining Ramachandran angles serves to restrict conformational flexibility of the loop apex.

Although the hydrophobic apex of the 2F5 CDR H3 does not contact the gp41 peptide directly the close proximity of the 2F5 epitope to the viral membrane suggests that this hydrophobic surface might interact directly with the viral membrane Panel B or at least allow 2F5 to accommodate an epitope that is in close proximity to the membrane perhaps by binding to membrane and allowing for enhanced scanning for the gp41 epitope. Perhaps relevant to this we observed the terminal residue of the 2F5 epitope on gp41 Trp to be positioned with its hydrophobic indole side chain aligned perfectly with the plane defined by the protruding 2F5 CHR H3 Panel B .

The gp41 ectodomain undergoes large conformational changes related to its function as a class I fusion protein Chan and Kim 1998 HIV entry and its inhibition 93 681 684 . Although we define here the structure of the 2F5 epitope it is important to further define the context of this structure both overall with respect to the fusogenic state of gp41 and locally with respect to neighboring regions.

In terms of overall conformation 2F5 is believed to bind optimally to a profusion or intermediate conformation of gp41 de Rosny et al. 2004 Binding of the 2F5 monoclonal antibody to native and fusion intermediate forms of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp411 implications for fusion inducing conformational changes 78 2627 2631 Finnegan et al. 2002 Antigenic properties of the human immunodeficiency virus transmembrane glycoprotein during cell cell fusion 76 12123 12134 Furuta et al. 1998 Capture of an early fusion active conformation of HIV 1 gp415 276 279 Sattentau et al. 1995 Epitope exposure on functional oligomeric HIV 1 gp41 molecules 206 713 717 although it may also recognize the postfusion six helix bundle conformation of gp41 Furuta et al. 1998 Capture of an early fusion active conformation of HIV 1 gp415 276 279 Zwick et al. 2001 Broadly neutralizing antibodies targeted to the membrane proximal external region of human immunodeficiency virus type I glycoprotein gp4175 10892 10905 . The structure of the prefusion viral spike has not been determined but several structures of the postfusion six helix bundle have been determined Chan et al. 1997 Core structure of gp41 from the HIV envelope glycoprotein 89 263 273 Weissenhorn et al. 1997 Atomic structure of the ectodomain from HIV 1 gp41387 426 430 . Compared to the six helix conformation which extends to Lysof gp41 Weissenhorn et al. 1997 Atomic structure of the ectodomain from HIV 1 gp41387 426 430 the RMSD of the overlapping main chain atoms of residues Gluto Lysis 3.9 with numerous steric clashes . If both the postfusion bundle and the 2F5 bound extended conformation of gp41 are rigidly fixed these would be incompatible. However there is considerable flexibility at the overlapping termini of both. The C terminal region of the six helix bundle is flexible and susceptible to proteolytic digestion all the way to residue Leu Chan et al. 1997 Core structure of gp41 from the HIV envelope glycoprotein 89 263 273 whereas our analysis shows that the 2F5 bound extended conformation of gp41 is not constrained by 2F5 until Leu. Superposition of a truncated HR2 helix to Leu with a truncated 2F5 epitope from Glu leads to an RMSD of 0.3 which would be compatible with 2F5 binding although perhaps at lower affinity.

In terms of the downstream region NMR analysis of residues Lysto Lys in dodecylphosphocholine micelles Schibli et al. 2001 The membrane proximal tryptophan rich region of the HIV glycoprotein gp41 forms a well defined helix in dodecylphosphocholine micelles 40 9570 9578 shows an entirely helical conformation . This would be incompatible with the 2F5 bound structure with an RMSD for the overlapping six residues residues 665 to 670 of 1.2 . However when helices form unless they encounter a helix breaking residue or alternative structure the stability gained by the intrachain hydrogen bonds of the helix often allows them to propagate extending the helical conformation. Our analysis of the 2F5 bound conformation of gp41 suggests that in the absence of the rest of the gp41 ectodomain it is held in this conformation primarily by interactions with 2F5. Thus in the absence of 2F5 it is not unexpected that a helix formed downstream of the 2F5 epitope might propagate further upstream. Nonetheless in light of the many direct contacts of 2F5 in the region of residues 661 to 670 and because 2F5 can bind to the membrane proximal region of gp41 in the presence of lipid when 2F5 is bound we would expect the region of residues 661 to 670 to adopt the extended conformation that we observe in the 2F5 gp41 crystal structure. Taken together the data suggest that the membrane proximal region at the start of the 2F5 epitope is relatively flexible perhaps assuming different conformations depending on the fusogenic state of gp41. From the center to the end of the 2F5 epitope residues 661 to 670 an extended mostly B conformation containing two overlapping type 1 turns stretches for roughly 25 . In the prefusogenic state this extended structure is presumably stabilized by interactions through its hidden face with the rest of the HIV ectodomain. Then from residues 670 to 683 a hydrophobic helix perhaps lying parallel with the viral membrane Scbibli et al. 2001 The membrane proximal tryptophan rich region of the HIV glycoprotein gp41 forms a well defined helix in dodecylphosphocholine micelles 40 9570 9578 would complete the ectodomain .

The structural model predicts that proper formation of the 2F5 and 4E10 epitopes should be strongly dependent on the presence of membrane. In order to confirm biochemically that an intimate association exists between the membrane proximal region of gp41 and the viral membrane we performed binding studies using PLs in which various envelope constructs are presented in either the presence or absence of lipid membrane. As shown in Panel A when JRFL gp145 is presented on PLs in the presence of lipid the affinity of both 2F5 and 4E10 increased. In contrast the presence of lipid had no effect on the affinity of the anti gp120 antibody b12.

To confirm that antibody binding to membrane proximal epitopes is not merely inhibited by aggregation or large scale structural rearrangement of the transmembrane region in the absence of lipid we interspersed the HA antibody epitope into three different locations of the membrane proximal region at the N terminus of the 2F5 epitope between the 2F5 and 4E10 epitopes and downstream of the 4E10 epitope Panel B . With the exception of 2F54E10 HA which displayed lower anti HA antibody binding regardless of the presence of lipid the binding of the HA antibody to the constructs is not affected by the presence of lipid Panel B . Binding of 2F5 however to HA 2F5 4E10 and 2F5 4E10 HA increased in the presence of lipid as did binding of 4E10 to HA 2F54E10 and 2F5 HA 4E10 Panel B . These results suggest that the membrane proximal region of these constructs is accessible even in the absence of membrane and that the lower binding affinity of 2F5 and 4E10 to gp41 after the loss of lipid is not an artifact but rather is an actual effect of the loss of a hydrophobic binding environment.

In addition to the presence of membrane these studies also suggest that the hydrophobic continuity of the membrane proximal region is an important factor in optimal 2F5 binding. In construct 2F5 HA4E10 Panel B where an HA tag disrupts the continuity of the membrane proximal region by being placed between the 2F5 and 4E10 epitopes the effect of enhanced membrane context 2F5 affinity is decreased. The membrane context effect is recovered however when the HA tag is placed downstream of the 4E10 epitope and continuity is restored Panel B . These results may be due to the fact that when Trp670 which is predicted from our structural analysis to lie along the plane of the viral membrane is displaced from the core 2F5 epitope by an HA tag the 2F5 epitope and therefore 2F5 itself is not sufficiently close to the membrane for the hydrophobic CDR H3 of 2F5 to fully enhance binding. Taken together these biochemical analyses confirm the structural model that the membrane proximal region of gp41 is intimately involved with the viral membrane and that the integrity of the 2F5 and 4E10 epitopes is highly membrane and sequence context dependent. Because the viral membrane is derived from host lipids it is seen as self by the immune system. Such an intimate membrane association with the viral envelope may help to obscure humoral immune recognition the membrane proximal region would sit on the membrane restricting steric accessibility to otherwise conserved potential neutralization epitopes. In this context we note that an examination of viral envelope class I fusion proteins shows that many of the lentiviruses which form persistent infections have similar long hydrophobic membrane proximal regions after their HR2 helices. In contrast for nonpersistent infections such as influenza and Ebola virus infections the membrane proximal regions are much less hydrophobic while those of morbillivirus measles and rubulavirus mumps are far shorter.

Because 2F5 and 4E10 do not block gp120 receptor interactions these antibodies may bind after virus cell surface attachment. But in order to do so they might face steric barriers related to this crowded interface as has been observed with CD41 antibodies where steric constraints preclude IgG binding Labrijn et al. 2003 Access of antibody molecules to the conserved coreceptor binding site on glycoprotein gp120 is sterically restricted on primary human immunodeficiency virus type 177 10557 10565 . Thus we sought to address whether the membrane proximal region of gp41 is subject to any large scale steric hindrances.

For this purpose we compared the neutralization capacities of the Fab versus the IgG for the respective antibodies. Since a Fab is approximately one third the size of an IgG if large scale steric clashes that hinder binding occur then one would expect the Fab to neutralize better than the IgG as is the case for the CD41 antibodies that bind at the sterically restricted virus cell interface Labrijn et al. 2003 Access of antibody molecules to the conserved coreceptor binding site on glycoprotein gp120 is sterically restricted on primary human immunodeficiency virus type 177 10557 10565 . In general however for antibodies that are not sterically restricted Fabs neutralize less well than the bulkier bivalent IgGs. As shown in the 2F5 and 4E10 Fabs Panels A and B as well as the gp120 reactive b12 Fab Panel C are less effective than their respective IgGs in neutralizing the primary HIV 1 strain JRFL suggesting that 2F5 and 4E10 are not affected by large scale steric hindrance of IgG access to the membrane proximal region.

The findings of this study suggest that an effective immunization strategy to elicit 2F5 or 4E10 like broadly neutralizing antibodies would likely have to account for viral mechanisms of immune evasion that constrain the membrane proximal region namely conformation surface occlusion and membrane proximity although perhaps not large scale steric accessibility. The precise conformation that 2F5 recognizes may be difficult to stabilize. Both the upstream six helix bundle and downstream membrane bound helix enforce different conformations on the 2F5 epitope. The stabilization of extended structures is also not trivial. Tight turns can be stabilized with designed disulfide or lactam bridges Panel A and such approaches are already under way McGaughey et al. 2003 HIV 1 vaccine development constrained peptide immunogens show improved binding to the anti HIV 1 gp41 MAb 42 3214 3223 Tian et al. 2002 Structure affinity relationships in the gp41 ELDKWA SEQ ID NO 19 epitope for the HIV 1 neutralizing monoclonal antibody 2F5 effects of side chain and backbone modifications and conformational constraints 59 264 276 even so such turns account for less than half of the 2F5 epitope. One critical question will be the degree of flexibility of the 2F5 epitope in the context of the full envelope ectodomain. Does the entire 2F5 bound conformation observed in this structure have to be stabilized or is only a critical substructure essential for broad immune recognition Such questions should be answerable by immunizations with structurally constrained antigens. Alternatively structures of the 2F5 epitope in a more complete ectodomain context or even in complex with another neutralizing antibody that recognizes the 2F5 epitope may also provide answers.

To account for local surface occlusion immunogens that induce antibodies that only bind to the 2F5 bound surface would need to be designed. This might be accomplished in a manner similar to that tried for anti gp120 immunogens for example by masking the unbound hidden surface of gp41 with carbohydrate modifications Panel B Pantophlet et al. 2003 Hyperglycosylated mutants of human immunodeficiency virus HIV type I monomeric gp120 as novel antigens for HIV vaccine design 77 5889 5901 . O linked glycosylation might be preferable in this case due to the smaller size of these glycans which would interfere less with the 2F5 bound face of the peptide. Alternatively one could anchor the epitope to a larger molecule or surface in a manner that would leave only the 2F5 bound surface exposed. For example one could first attach reactive groups on to the hidden face of the gp41 epitope then bind the 2F5 complex to a nonimmunogenic graphite or plastic surface that reacts with these groups and then release 2F5. The latter approach not only would eliminate local surface occlusion but also would allow the reactive groups to weld the 2F5 enforced conformation into place.

In terms of membrane proximity one could present a conformationally stabilized surface occluded immunogen in the context of membrane either on virus like particles or on PLs Grundner et al. 2002 Solid phase proteoliposomes containing human immunodeficiency virus envelope glycoproteins 76 3511 3521 Panel C . The enhanced 2F5 binding that we observed in the context of a PL membrane suggests that even in a highly artificial context the presence of membrane recapitulates essential components of 2F5 and 4E10 recognition.

Elicitation of 2F5 like antibodies with any of these immunogens could be enhanced with prime boost strategies Panel D . For example priming with a conformationally stabilized surface occluded membrane anchored immunogen may elicit high titers of antibodies only a small portion of which recognize virus. A boost on the other hand composed of the complete wild type envelope ectodomain and presented in a membrane anchored context should select antibodies capable of binding wild type virus. Such prime boost strategies could be repeated for example with diverse strains of HIV or with additional peptides to enhance antibody specificity and titer.

These immunization strategies should account for the constraints on the conserved membrane proximal epitope suggested by our mechanistic analysis of the 2F5 gp41 crystal structure. Whether the analysis presented here defines a sufficient road map for elicitation of 2F5 or 4E10 like antibodies will need to be determined experimentally. Our studies on 2F5 and those of others on b12 and 2G12 Calarese et al. 2003 Antibody domain exchange is an immunological solution to carbohydrate cluster recognition 300 2065 2071 Saphire et al. 2001 Crystal structure of a neutralizing human IGG against HIV 1 a template for vaccine design 293 1155 1159 Zwick et al. 2001 Broadly neutralizing antibodies targeted to the membrane proximal external region of human immunodeficiency virus type I glycoprotein gp4175 10892 10905 present a paradigm for using structural information from broadly neutralizing antibodies to understand and overcome HIV 1 mechanisms of immune evasion.

Three examples of immunogen platforms are shown in . Panels A and B show schematic illustrations of the results of immunizations with nucleic acid molecules i.e. genetic immunizations that encode the 2F5 epitope in association with the 4E 10 Z13 epitopes a transmembrane domain and a heterologous protein X Panel A or gp41 ectodomain sequence Panel B that have been designed for desired presentation of the 2F5 epitope. Panel C is a schematic representation of a 2F5 peptide immunogen wherein the peptide has been designed for the desired presentation of the 2F5 epitope.

 26mer refers to the membrane proximal region of gp41 from NEQ through the 4E10 epitope to the putative beginning of the transmembrane domain NEQELLELDKWASLWNWFNITNWLWYIK SEQ ID NO 20 

 C9 refers to short peptide epitope tag which can be recognized by the 1D4 antibody. C9 is added for PL capture and will not interfere with genetic expression His capture is a potential improvement as are varying the lipid ratios

 PADRE refers to a T helper epitope pan DR epitope PADRE described in WO 95 07707 and in the corresponding paper Alexander J et al. 1994 Immunity 1 751 761

The nucleotide sequence of the heavy chain variable region of the 2F5 antibody is used as query sequence find homologous immunoglobulins. The following immunoglobulins are identified X69690 L21964 X62111 L21972 L21968. This analysis reveals that the 2F5 antibody has a high degree of sequence homology with autoreactive antibodies especially with an anti cardiolipin antibody X69690 AF455551 which also utilizes the D3 3 D segment germline gene. The sequences of polynucleotides encoding these genes is shown below 

These results indicate that a useful approach to generation of 2F5 like anti HIV neutralizing antibodies is to present a gp41 membrane proximal immunogen in a membrane proteoliposome context wherein the membrane context differs from the normal membrane context of the outer plasma membrane. For example the membrane context might be varied to include different ratios of lipids or to include cardiolipin or other lipids that are not normally found on the outer plasma membrane.

An immunogen that can fit into a genetic platform and elicit 2F5 and 4E10 like broadly neutralizing anti HIV antibodies is designed. Structural analysis of the 2F5 antibody in complex with the membrane proximal region of the gp41 ectodomain indicated two components in 2F5 antibody binding of the membrane proximal region of gp41 The first component is a specific high affinity interaction with the gp41 protein. The second component is a non specific direct interaction between the hydrophobic apex of the 2F5 CDRH3 loop with the viral membrane. The structural analysis of the binding interaction also indicated that a charged face of the gp41 membrane proximal region is exclusively bound by 2F5 while a non bound highly hydrophobic face may be occluded in the larger native spike. Thus the design of an immunogen capable of eliciting 2F5 and 4E10 like antibodies may incorporate the following three factors 

1 Structural stabilization of the immunogen into the conformation of the membrane proximal region when bound to 2F5 or 4E10.

3 Presentation of the conformationally stabilized surface occluded immunogen in the context of a membrane.

One strategy for the initial modeling of a genetic platform for the immunogen is a strategy is based on the use of a structural homology search. No hits are obtained using the dali server when the 2F5 bound peptide structure is queried or when any of five different extended structures extended to include the downstream region of gp41 that is bound by the 4E10 antibody using a published NMR structure of that region at five different angles are queried. In essence a helical extension is modeled at five different angles all having the helix lying horizontally along the external surface of the viral membrane. A program called grath also does not yield hits when queried with the 2F5 bound peptide structure but does yield hits when queried with the five extended peptide structures. Four out of the five extended structures yield identical hits while one at 90 degrees yield some unique hits. The results of queries in grath with the extended structures are shown in Tables 4 and 5 below.

A second strategy for the initial modeling of a genetic platform for the immunogen is a strategy that employs a search of the known structures of integral membrane proteins and the identification of any motifs that might mimic or present a good platform for inserting the membrane proximal immunogen. The known structures of membrane proteins are examined to determine if the loop helix motif of the gp41 membrane proximal region could be easily inserted or if such a motif already exists on the surface of one of these proteins. The website World Wide Web at blanco.biomol.uci.edu Membrane Proteins xtal.html which has a comprehensive list of known integral membrane protein structures as well as links to relevant references is employed. Since many of the structures are similar based on the class to which they belong the list is categorized accordingly and approximately 75 100 of the structures in each category are searched qualitatively. In general four elements are searched for in the structures 1 the presence of extracellular loop helix motifs that mimic the structure of the membrane proximal region of gp41 2 the presence of extracellular loops which can be substituted with the 2F5 4E10 immunogen 3 whether the structures provide an adequate membrane context for the gp41 immunogen 4 whether the structures provide a possible mechanism for occluding the non 2F5 bound face of the membrane proximal region.

Six structures based on category are selected which appear to be tractable for use as a platform for insertion and further optimization of the gp41 membrane proximal immunogen. They are as follows 1 the potassium channels 2 SecYE protein conducting channel 3 photosynthetic reaction center 4 Cytochrome bc1 complex 5 bacterial rhodopsin and 6 beta barrel membrane proteins porins and relatives . In general the identified structures fall into two groups those that contain a semblance of a loop helix motif on the membrane surface with the helix lying horizontally on the membrane surface and those that just contain a loop on the membrane surface. The structures of the Cytochrome bc1 complex potassium channel SecYE protein conducting channel and the photosynthetic reaction center all contain some form of a loop helix motif while the bacterial rhodopsins and beta barrel membrane proteins just contain extracellular loops that appear large enough to accommodate an insertion. Detailed notes on each the identified structures are provided below.

A set of gp41 constructs were rationally designed based on the 28mer construct NEQELLELDKWASLWNWFNITNWLWYIK SEQ ID NO 20 

Hydrophobic CD4 TM or fusion peptide FP residues were added to the five prime to the 28mer to potentially enhance lipid bilayer association. The C34 and A C34 elements were added as spacers between the 28mer and the hydrophobic domain. The transient expression of the 2F5 epitopes by a set of variant gp41MPR constructs was examined by FACS analysis . The data demonstrate the 2F5 antibody binding is enhanced when the epitope is expressed in the context of Fu 28mer and 2 C34 28mer indicating either increased expression or an increase in 2F5 binding affinity. The transient expression of the 4E10 epitope by a set of variant MPR constructs was analyzed by FACS analysis . The data demonstrate that similar to 2F5 4E10 antibody binding is enhanced when the epitope is expressed in the context of Fu 28mer and 2 C34 28mer indicating either increased expression or an increase in 4E10 binding affinity.

