---

title: Method and device for questioning a plurality of computerized devices
abstract: Some embodiments of the present invention may relate to a device and a method of questioning computerized devices within an organization's network. The device, in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention, may include a questioning module and an agentless module. The questioning module may be adapted to receive data specifying a plurality of computerized devices to be questioned, and to receive data indicating which one or more questioning subjects are selected to be questioned on the specified computerized devices. The agentless module may be adapted to invoke and configure at least a remote access process, to question at least a registry of a remote computerized device. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention, the questioning module may be adapted to utilize multiple threads of the agentless module to invoke and configure a plurality of remote access processes to question in parallel and without using agents at least a registry of the specified computerized devices, in accordance with the selected questioning subjects.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07752671&OS=07752671&RS=07752671
owner: Promisec Ltd.
number: 07752671
owner_city: Tel Aviv
owner_country: IL
publication_date: 20050915
---
This application claims the benefit of the following U.S. Provisional Applications U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 672 050 filed on Apr. 18 2005 U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 672 072 filed on Apr. 18 2005 U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 672 045 filed on Apr. 18 2005 and U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 672 046 filed on Apr. 18 2005 and also the benefit of an Israeli Patent Application No. IL164402 filed on Oct. 5 2004 which are all hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention generally relates to the field of information security. More specifically the present invention relates to a method and a device for enabling agentless and parallel questioning of at least the registries of a plurality of computerized devices under a common administrative domain for example to detect indications of potential threats.

Information and digital information in particular is at the heart of most organizations today. Regrettably nowadays information systems are under constant threat and precious data is often at risk of being corrupted of being disclosed or even stolen by an unauthorized party. The financial ramifications of these risks are too great for these risks to be ignored. Unfortunately existing information security solutions are not able to provide a comprehensive solution ensuring reliable and continuous protection against existing threats compromising the organizational data.

The reliance upon the Internet for carrying different kinds of communications both within the organizations networks and with the outside world public remote sites business partners etc. together with the introduction into the market and the proliferation of many sophisticated miniature storage devices e.g. USB attachable devices used as disks and other advanced technologies present new security challenges to which there is no satisfying solution. Most existing IT security solutions are essentially improvements of existing solutions and are based on the outdated assumption that threats come only from external sources e.g. the Internet . Therefore most of the present IT security solutions regard entities within the organization s network as trusted whereas entities outside the organizations network are regarded as untrusted . The increasing amount of threats making use of simple means and methods for creating backdoors into the internal organizational network is alarming evidence of the weakness of the peripheral defense approach which includes for example all existing gateway security products e.g. firewalls anti virus content inspection IDS IPS and other filters . Indeed world famous research groups recently estimated that over 80 of incidents of breaching organizational information security originate from inside an organization itself maliciously or due to lack of awareness therefore it is critically important to achieve a balance between the protection against external threats and internal ones e.g. employees contractors etc. and to provide security personnel with a focused solution allowing them to effectively monitor activities involving computers in internal networks for example monitoring compliance with information security policies .

Attempts have been made to fill part of the security void described above however thus far all the proposed solutions have suffered from major drawbacks and either offer only a partial solution against the wide range of threats and or are technologically lacking and none is sufficiently comprehensive straightforward flexible and or effective. For example some solutions require that the network be scanned one computer after the other. For data security purposes this is unacceptable due to the amount of time required to complete a questioning cycle of any significant number of devices. Other suggested partial solutions rely on agent applications which must be installed on each device which is to be questioned and then must be managed on each of the devices where it is installed. An agent based solution requires that each computerized device which is to be allowed to communicate with the organization s networks be installed with the appropriate agent application. The installations alone whether they are automatic semi automatic or manual require substantial human resources and may be quite time consuming. An agent installation on any number of servers and workstations may fail to operate without such failure being noticed causing a severe and undetected security breach. Agent installation is problematic from a technical point of view as well. When installing an agent and as long as the agent is installed it is necessary to ensure for each computerized device on which the agent is or is being installed that there are no conflicts between the agent application and other software components on the computerized device. Such conflicts may hamper or even neutralize the operation of the agent. This creates a further ongoing burden on system administration resources and personnel. In addition to the above agent applications even during normal operation are wasteful of local and network resources.

A different group of information security tools includes various vulnerability scanners. Vulnerability scanners are typically used to detect unnecessary unauthorized services such as open ports for example and other vulnerabilities which are only a part of the vulnerabilities on the network and or operating system level. Vulnerability scanners are not able to address all threats on the Operating System level as well as threats which operate on the application level which are quite common and may cause considerable damage to the organization. Another group of tools of interest although not specifically intended for information security purposes are inventory asset modules. Inventory modules are commonly used by system administrators or by logistic personnel to produce inventory lists which include various hardware and software resources installed on the computers monitored by the inventory modules. However as mentioned above inventory modules are not intended for security purposes and consequently are not able to produce inventory data which is focused on security threats. The data which may be produced by inventory modules typically includes a large amount of irrelevant data and the data relating to security threats may often be only partial from an information security perspective. Furthermore in order to have some although limited relevance for purposes of information security an additional process of analyzing the large amount of data returned by the inventory modules is required in order to discover potential threats. This analysis as well as being lengthy requires special expertise and great care. Furthermore inventory modules are not able to scan a large number of computers in a substantially short time and thus there could be some chance that a security threat will remain undetected by the inventory module for a substantially long period of time and may even not be detected at all. Some security threats need only a short period of time to cause substantial damage and must be detected and stopped as quickly as possible. Therefore due to the long period of time required to obtain the inventory lists and the additional amount of time required to analyze the returned data as well as their lack of focus on security threats inventory modules cannot provide an adequate IT security solution.

There is thus a need for a system method and device for efficiently questioning computerized devices within an organization s network. There is a further need to provide such a system and method capable of remotely scanning in parallel a plurality of computerized devices for one or more subjects associated with security threats without using agent applications. There is yet a further need to provide such a system and method which is substantially comprehensive straightforward and flexible.

Some embodiments of the present invention may relate to a device and a method of questioning computerized devices within an organization s network. The device in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention may include a questioning module adapted to receive data specifying a plurality of computerized devices to be questioned and to receive data indicating which one or more questioning subjects are to be questioned on the specified computerized devices. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to invoke and configure a plurality of remote access processes to question in parallel and without using agents at least a registry of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the selected questioning subjects.

According to further embodiments of the present invention the device for questioning computerized devices within an organization s network may include a questioning module and an agentless module. The questioning module may be adapted to receive data specifying a plurality of computerized devices to be questioned and to receive data indicating which one or more questioning subjects are selected to be questioned on the specified computerized devices. The agentless module adapted to invoke and configure at least a remote access process to question at least a registry of a remote computerized device. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to utilize multiple threads of the agentless module to invoke in parallel and configure a plurality of remote access processes to question in parallel and without using agents at least a registry of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the selected questioning subjects. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module is adapted to utilize in parallel a substantially large number of threads of said agentless module.

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the questioning subjects may be associated with security threats. In accordance with yet further embodiments of the present invention the questioning subjects may be associated with one or more specific locations within at least the registry of a computerized device where an indication of a security threat may be found during questioning.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to select which one or more of the questioning subjects are to be questioned on each of the computerized devices. According to further embodiments of the device of the present invention the device may further include a user interface. The user interface may enable for example for a user to select either directly or indirectly one or more of the computerized devices to be questioned. The user interface may further enable a user to select either directly or indirectly which one or more questioning subjects are to be questioned on one or more of the specified computerized devices to be questioned.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to determine the number of threads of the agentless module to be utilized to question the specified computerized devices. The questioning module may be adapted to determine the number of threads of the agentless module which are to be utilized in accordance with one or more of the following the number of computerized devices to be questioned the desired scanning speed one or more network performance parameters the subjects to be questioned and or the threat s severity. For example in case it is determined or it is indicated that a certain one or more of the questioning subjects to be questioned on the computerized devices is associated with a severe security threat the questioning module may be configured to invoke for example a substantially large number of threads of the agentless module.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to assign to each thread of the agentless module one or more of the specified computerized devices. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to assign to each thread of the agentless module one or more questioning subjects selected to be questioned on one or more of the specified computerized devices assigned to that thread of the agentless module.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure each of the invoked remote access processes to question one or more specific locations within the computerized devices assigned to that thread in accordance with the questioning subject selected to be questioned on the computerized devices. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure each of the invoked remote access processes to question one or more specific locations within at least a registry of the computerized devices assigned to that thread in accordance with the questioning subject selected for each of the computerized devices and which have been assigned to that thread.

According to some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to assign to one or more threads of the agentless module predefined data corresponding to certain data which may be found in one or more of the specified locations associated with one or more of the questioning subjects assigned to that or these thread or threads. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention one or more of the agentless modules may be adapted to configure one or more of the invoked remote access processes to compare the actual data found in one or more specific locations within the computerized devices associated with one or more of the questioning subjects assigned to that or these threads against the predefined data associated with the one or more of the questioning subjects which correspond to the data which may be found in one or more of the specified locations.

According to some embodiments of the device of the present invention the device may further include one or more databases. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention one or more of the databases may include prestored data corresponding to one or more computerized devices. In accordance with yet further embodiments of the present invention as part of specifying the computerized devices to be questioned prestored data corresponding to computerized devices may be obtained from the database. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention one or more of the databases may include prestored data corresponding to one or more questioning subjects. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention as part of selecting one or more questioning subjects to be questioned on the specified computerized devices prestored data corresponding to one or more questioning subjects may be obtained from the database.

According to some embodiments of the device of the present invention the device may further include a results analysis module. The results analysis module may be adapted to process the results received in response to the questioning of at least the registry of the specified computerized devices. The results analysis module may be adapted to generate a report corresponding to the results. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the results analysis module may be adapted to execute one or more predefined actions or procedures based on one or more of the received results. For example in accordance with embodiments of the present invention the results analysis module may be adapted to utilize one or more threads of the agentless module to invoke and configure one or more remote access processes to modify or delete certain data on one or more of the remote computerized devices which were questioned.

According to some embodiments of the present invention a method of questioning computerized devices within an organization s network may include specifying a plurality of computerized devices to be questioned selecting one or more questioning subjects to be questioned on the specified computerized devices and invoking in parallel and configuring a plurality of remote access processes to question in parallel and without using agents at least a registry of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the selected questioning subjects.

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the selecting of one or more questioning subjects may further include selecting which one or more of the questioning subjects that are to be questioned on each of the specified computerized devices.

According to some embodiments of the method of the present invention the method may further include utilizing in parallel a plurality of threads of an agentless module each of the threads being adapted to invoke and configure at least one remote access processes to question at least a registry of a remote computerized device. According to further embodiments of the present invention the utilizing may further include assigning to each of the plurality of threads of an agentless module one or more of the specified computerized devices and one or more of the questioning subjects to be questioned on the one or more computerized devices.

According to some embodiments of the method of the present invention the method may further include determining the number of threads of the agentless module to be invoked in accordance with one or more of the following the number of computerized devices to be questioned the desired scanning speed one or more network performance parameters the subjects to be questioned and or the threat s severity. According to further embodiments of the present invention the assigning may further include assigning to one or more of the of threads of the agentless module data corresponding to one or more specific locations within the computerized devices assigned to that or these threads in accordance with one or more of the questioning subjects selected to be questioned on the computerized devices.

According to some embodiments of the method of the present invention the method may further include receiving results in response to the questioning of at least the registry of the specified computerized devices and generating a report corresponding to the results received in response to the questioning of the specified computerized devices. According to further embodiments of the method of the present invention the method may further include executing one or more predefined actions or procedures based on one or more of the received results. According to yet further embodiments of the method of the present invention the method may further include utilizing one or more threads of the agentless module to invoke and configure one or more remote access processes to modify or delete certain data on one or more of the remote computerized device which were questioned.

It will be appreciated that for simplicity and clarity of illustration elements shown in the figures have not necessarily been drawn to scale. For example the dimensions of some of the elements may be exaggerated relative to other elements for clarity. Further where considered appropriate reference numerals may be repeated among the figures to indicate corresponding or analogous elements.

In the following detailed description numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the invention. However it will be understood by those skilled in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known methods procedures and components have not been described in detail so as not to obscure the present invention.

Unless specifically stated otherwise as apparent from the following discussions it is appreciated that throughout the specification discussions utilizing terms such as processing computing calculating determining generating assigning or the like refer to the action and or processes of a computer or computing system or similar electronic computing device that manipulate and or transform data represented as physical such as electronic quantities within the computing system s registers and or memories into other data similarly represented as physical quantities within the computing system s memories registers or other such information storage transmission or display devices.

Embodiments of the present invention may include apparatuses for performing the operations herein. This apparatus may be specially constructed for the desired purposes or it may comprise a general purpose computer selectively activated or reconfigured by a computer program stored in the computer. Such a computer program may be stored in a computer readable storage medium such as but not limited to any type of disk including floppy disks optical disks CD ROMs magnetic optical disks read only memories ROMs random access memories RAMs electrically programmable read only memories EPROMs electrically erasable and programmable read only memories EEPROMs magnetic or optical cards or any other type of media suitable for storing electronic instructions and capable of being coupled to a computer system bus.

The processes and displays presented herein are not inherently related to any particular computer or other apparatus. Various general purpose systems may be used with programs in accordance with the teachings herein or it may prove convenient to construct a more specialized apparatus to perform the desired method. The desired structure for a variety of these systems will appear from the description below. In addition embodiments of the present invention are not described with reference to any particular programming language. It will be appreciated that a variety of programming languages may be used to implement the teachings of the inventions as described herein.

Throughout the specification and the claims the term organization s network unless stated otherwise shall be used to mean any group of computerized devices forming a network of an organization. An organization s network as used herein unless stated otherwise may be comprised of one or more interconnected LANs Local Area Networks over any type of connection WANs Wide Area Networks and or wireless communication networks etc and any combination thereof. The organization s network may be under a single administrative domain or under more than one administrative domain and may include one or more additional computerized devices which are not connected to the organizational network on a regular basis but which are at least partially under the control of the organization s network administer s .

Reference is now made to which is an enlarged illustration of a device for questioning computerized devices within an organization s network according to some embodiments of the present invention. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention a device for questioning computerized devices within an organization s network may include a questioning module and an agentless module . In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be operatively connected to the agentless module . It should be noted that according to some embodiments of the present invention the agentless module may be integrated into the questioning module .

Reference is now additionally made to FIG which is a flow chart illustration of some embodiments of a method of questioning computerized devices within an organization s network according to some embodiments of the present invention. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to receive data specifying a plurality of computerized devices to be questioned block . In addition the questioning module may be adapted to receive data corresponding to one or more selected questioning subjects to be questioned on the specified computerized devices block . Additional discussions relating to the nature of the questioning subjects shall be provided hereinbelow with reference to yet further embodiments of the present invention.

According to some embodiments of the present invention in accordance with the specified computerized devices to be questioned and or in accordance with the selected questioning subjects to be questioned the questioning module may be adapted to determine the number of threads of the agentless module to be utilized or activated block . The questioning module may be adapted to assign to each thread of the agentless module one or more of the specified computerized devices to be questioned and one or more of the selected questioning subjects to be questioned on that or these computerized devices block . According to some embodiments of the present invention in some cases one or more computerized devices to be questioned may be assigned to a certain thread of the agentless module together with all the questioning subjects selected for that or these computerized device whereas in other cases a certain group consisting of one or more computerized devices may be assigned to two or more threads of the agentless module and the questioning subjects selected for that group of computerized devices may be divided among the threads to which the group has been assigned.

According to some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to obtain and to provide to each thread of the agentless module any data which may be necessary to facilitate the questioning of the computerized devices assigned thereto in accordance with the questioning subjects selected for that or these computerized devices and which have been assigned to that thread of the agentless module . Some examples of such information will be described in greater detail hereinbelow. Further discussions relating to the number of threads to be utilized and relating to the assignment of the computerized devices and the questioning subjects to be questioned and also discussions relating to the kinds of data which may be provided to the agentless module shall be provided hereinbelow.

According to some embodiments of the present invention the agentless module may be operatively coupled to a remote access process or module . In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the remote access process may be capable of questioning at least the registry of a remote computerized device without using agents. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the remote access process may also be adapted to modify write overwrite modify delete etc data stored within at least the registry of a remote computerized device. According to further embodiments of the present invention the remote access process may be adapted to question a specific location within at least the registry of a remote computerized device upon receiving appropriate instructions or upon being appropriately programmed or configured to question the specific location within at least the registry of a particular computerized device.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to invoke at least one and typically one for example remote access process . Thus according to some embodiments of the present invention a plurality of threads of the agentless module may be adapted to invoke simultaneously a plurality of remote access processes . As part of invoking the remote access process each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure at least one remote process . In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure the at least a remote access process to access and to question one or more specific locations within at least the registry of one or more specific computerized devices. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to utilize in parallel multiple threads of the agentless module to invoke a plurality of remote access processes to question in parallel and without using agents at least a registry of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the selected questioning subjects. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention as part of utilizing or activating the threads of the agentless module the questioning module may be adapted to configure each of the threads of the agentless module being utilized to cause one or more remote access processes to be invoked in a manner to remotely question without using agents at least a registry of one or more computerized devices assigned to that thread of the agentless module in accordance with one or more questioning subjects selected to be questioned on that or these computerized devices and which the questioning subject selected for that computerized device s have been assigned to that thread of the agentless module block .

As part of some embodiments of the present invention each of the remote access processes may be configured to generate for one or more of the questioning subjects to be questioned on one or more of the computerized devices an appropriate query and to utilize the communication module to remotely question the computerized device in accordance with the questioning subject. As part of further embodiments of the present invention the communication module may be used by a plurality of remote access processes to question in parallel at least a registry of the specified computerized devices. As part of further embodiments of the present invention each of the remote access processes may be adapted to extract from a remote computerized device being questioned any relevant indication corresponding to the data found or the lack of thereof in a specific location associated with a questioning subject. As part of extracting the data each of the remote access processes may be configured to return the indications extracted from the remote computerized device in connection with the questioning subjects to device or to any of its components. As part of further embodiments of the present invention the specific location in which the remote access process is to look for the data or the lack of thereof may be provided to the remote access process by one of the threads of the agentless module during the configuration of that remote access process . It should be noted that as part of some embodiments of the present invention each of the remote access process may be adapted to utilize any known or tools yet to be devised in the future for questioning designated destinations on a remote computerized device including but not limited to various tools which are a part of some operating systems presently sold on the market. It should also be noted that some embodiments of the present invention are not limited to the use of any particular remote access process.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the process described above may be initiated manually and or may be launched automatically. For example the process described above may be scheduled and may be automatically initiated at predefined times. In accordance with a further example the process may be automatically launched in response to a predefined event.

As part of some embodiments of the present invention the device for questioning computerized devices within an organization s network may be connected to the organization s network . For example as is shown in the device may be part of one of the LANs and may be operatively connected to the WAN and to the remote computerized devices connected to the LAN and which are at least partially under the control of the organization s network administer s .

Returning now to in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the device may be operatively coupled to or may include a communication module . The communication module may be for example a Network Interface Card NIC of a security manager s computer to which the device may be operatively coupled or included within. The communication module may be configured to enable the device to communicate with at least some and typically all of the computerized devices within the organization s network . It should be noted that the communication module is included as part of the device in accordance with optional embodiments of the device and that in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the communication module may be omitted from the device and an external communication interface or module may be utilized by the device or by one or more components of the device to communicate with the computerized devices in the organization network .

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the device may include a storage device . The storage device may be used to store predetermined data relating to the computerized devices within the organization network and or data relating to predefined questioning subjects. The data within the storage device may be organized in any data structure including but not limited to one or more databases. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the device may include a user interface or interfaces . The user interface may be used to enable receipt of data from a user of the device and or to output data for the user for example to display results or to print reports . For example the user may utilize the user interface to input data relating to computerized devices to be questioned and or to create new questioning subjects or to update existing questioning subjects to be questioned on the specified computerized devices or to select existing questioning subjects to be questioned on the specified computerized devices. In accordance with yet further embodiments of the present invention the device may be coupled to exterior data sources such as an organizational prime domain controller PDC an organizational active directory AD or various kinds of files from which data relating to computerized devices to be questioned and or to questioning subjects to be questioned may be imported. Each of the above data sources may be used as an alternative or in combination with one another to specify the computerized devices to be questioned and or to select or create the questioning subject to be questioned on the specified computerized devices. For example a substantially complete list of all the users within the organizational network may be obtained from an organizational active directory and the user may utilize the user interface to specify which of these computerized devices are to be questioned.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention once the computerized devices to be questioned are specified if necessary the questioning module may be adapted to obtain from one or more of the data sources or data input interfaces mentioned above data relating to the ID of the computerized devices to be questioned. However in case the ID of some or all of the specified computerized devices is provided to the questioning module as part of the specification thereof for these computerized devices it may not be necessary to separately obtain an ID. The computerized devices to be questioned may be specified by their network address IP address for example and or by the computerized device s name within the network host name . However any other suitable identification data known in the present or yet to be devised in the future may be used in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the list of computerized devices to be questioned may be temporarily stored on a storage medium for example on the device s storage medium . In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention as part of utilizing the multiple threads of the agentless module the questioning module may provide to each thread of the agentless module the ID s of the computerized devices which have been or are being assigned to that thread of the agentless module .

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention one or more and possibly all of the questioning subject may be associated with a specific location and possibly more than one location within at least the registry of a computerized device. Returning now to in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention once the questioning subjects to be questioned on the specified computerized devices are selected the questioning module may be adapted to obtain for each of the selected questioning subjects data directing to a specific location or locations within at least a registry or data providing a path s to specific location s of a remote computerized device block . The data directing to a location or locations within at least a registry of a remote computerized device may indicate where data associated with the questioning subject may be found or is expected to be found on a computerized device.

In accordance with yet further embodiments of the present invention in addition for one or more of the selected questioning subjects data relating to specific data a specific value for example which may be found in the specified location s may also be obtained by the questioning module block . In accordance with yet further embodiments of the present invention the data relating to the specific indications data which may be found in the specified location s may be indicative if the indications are found in the specified location s of a security threat.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the data directing to a specific location or locations on a remote computerized device and or the data relating to the specific data which may be found in the specified location s may be presorted and may be automatically obtained for each of the selected questioning subjects or only for some. However in accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the data directing to a specific location or locations on a remote computerized device and or the data relating to specific data which may be found in the specified location s may be manually provided by a user for one or more of the selected questioning subjects following the selection thereof.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention as part of utilizing the multiple threads of the agentless module the questioning module may provide for each thread of the agentless module the relevant data directing to a specific location or locations on a remote computerized device and or the relevant data relating to specific data which may be found in the specified location s in accordance with the questioning subjects assigned to that thread of the agentless module .

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention as part of invoking one or more of the remote access processes each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure or program the remote access process es to determine as part of questioning the remote computerized devices whether the computerized devices include data in the location associated with the questioning subject. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention as part of questioning a remote computerized device for a questioning subject the remote access processes used for the questioning may be configured to cause the remote computerized devices to return an indication relating to the existence of data in a specified location associated with the questioning subject or the lack of thereof and in the case where data is found as a further part of the questioning to return an indication relating to the actual data found in the specified location. The location to which the indication may relate may be the location associated with the questioning subject questioned on the computerized device. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention an appropriate indication may be returned for each questioning subject and for each computerized device on which the questioning subject was questioned. It should be noted that in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the remote access processes which may be for example but are not limited to various APIs may use any necessary tools in order to generate appropriate queries in a manner to question the remote computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects.

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention as part of invoking one or more of the remote access processes each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure or program the remote access process es to determine whether the actual data found on the remote computerized device in connection with a certain questioning subject fulfills a predefined relationship with a predefined value or if the data found is of a certain type or not associated with that questioning subject. In accordance with yet a further embodiment of the present invention as part of invoking one or more of the remote access processes each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure or program the remote access process es to determine whether the data found in a specific location within a registry of a computerized device fulfils a predefined relationship with a predefined registry key name s registry value name s and or registry value data s associated with the questioning subject that is associated with that specific location. It should be noted that in order to enable the remote access processes to determine whether the actual data found on the remote computerized device in connection with a certain questioning subject fulfils a predefined relationship with a predefined value some of the presently known remote access processes may require some modifications and or enhancements which will be readily apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art. It should be further noted that the process of comparing the results against predefined values may optionally be carried out as part of a results analysis process either as an alternative or in addition to the comparison discussed above. The handling of the results of the questioning shall be discussed in greater detail hereinbelow.

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention as part of invoking one or more of the remote access processes each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to configure or program the remote access process es being invoked by that thread to question one or more of the specified computerized devices for one or more questioning subjects in accordance with the ID s of the computerized devices assigned to that thread and in accordance with the data directing to a specific location or locations corresponding to the questioning subject which have been assigned to that thread. In accordance with yet further optional embodiments of the present invention as part of invoking one or more of the remote access processes one or more threads of the agentless module may be adapted to configure or program the remote access process es being invoked by that or these thread s to compare the actual data found in a specific location on a remote computerized device with the presorted data relating to one or more specific indications which may be found in the specified location s . In accordance with yet further embodiments of the present invention as part of invoking one or more of the remote access processes one or more threads of the agentless module may be adapted to configure or program the remote access process es being invoked by that or these thread s to return a certain predefined indication in case the presorted data and the actual data found in the specified location fulfill a certain relation. More than one relation may be predefined and a different indication may be associated with each relation. The thread of the agentless module may accordingly configure the remote access process.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the specified computerized devices to be questioned may be predefined or may be specifically selected for each scan. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention a list of computerized devices may be provided before each scan for example a list including all the computerized devices connected or associated with the organization s network and the computerized devices to be questioned may be selected from the comprehensive list. In case the list of computerized devices to be questioned is predefined the list may be stored in a database or in any other data structure which may be stored on a memory or on the storage device a hard disc for example . In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention in case the list of computerized devices is created specifically for each scan of the computerized devices many methodologies and techniques and any combination thereof may be used to compile the list. For example the computerized devices to be questioned may be automatically selected in accordance with predefined criteria and or the computerized devices to be questioned may be manually selected by a user for example through the user interface . Any of the techniques or methodologies described above may be used in combination with any other to create the list of computerized devices to be questioned.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to assign for each of the specified computerized devices to be questioned one or more questioning subjects to be questioned on that computerized device. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning subject s which are to be questioned on each computerized device may be pre selected in advance or may be manually selected by a user for each questioning process. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning subjects may be associated with security threats for example each questioning subject may be associated with one or more specific threats. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the questioning subjects may be associated with various applications services and or hardware devices typically but not necessarily auxiliary hardware devices such as USB storage devices which an evidence of which or of a certain combination of which may be indicative of a security threat if found on a computerized device connected to or associated with the organization s network.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning subject may be predefined and or may be manually or semi manually defined by a user. In case a certain questioning subject is defined by a user the user may utilize the user interface to provide the questioning module with data regarding the questioning subject possibly in addition to presorted data associated with questioning subject. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention data relating to predefined questioning subjects may be presorted on a storage medium for example storage medium and the relevant data may be retrieved from the storage medium once the questioning subjects to be questioned on the selected computerized devices are selected. For example in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the storage medium may be used to store a data structure or a database including data relating to a plurality of predefined questioning subjects. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the data stored in the database may be but is not necessarily associated with known security threats.

An example of a possible questioning subjects database including data associated with questioning subjects is illustrated in to which reference is now made. Each questioning subject may be identified by a certain name. The subject s name may be for example the name which is commonly used to refer to the threat with which the subject is associated however any name may be used. In addition to the subject s name as is shown in for each questioning subject one or more paths directing to a specific location or locations on a remote computerized device may be provided. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the paths or path may be associated with a location or locations on a remote computerized device where data associated with the questioning subject may be found or is expected to be found in case for example the security threat associated with the questioning subject is present on the computerized device. For example the paths or path may be associated with a location or locations on a remote computerized device where an indication of the presence of an application a service or a hardware device may be found and which indication if found for example in the specified location may be indicative of a known security threat.

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the questioning subjects database may include for one or more of the questioning subjects therein data relating to specific indications data or values which may be found in the specific location provided for that or these questioning subject s . For example the indication s may be indicative of a known security threat if found in the specified location within a computerized device or the indication s may be expected to be found in case a known security threat is present on a computerized device being questioned. One possible example of such an indication may be a status indication. The status indication may for example indicate whether a known security threat is present on the computerized device where the indication has been found and or whether it has been installed on the computerized device where the status indication has been found and or whether the security threat associated with the indication is active on the computerized device where the indication has been found. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention one or more of the questioning subjects may be associated with one or more locations within a registry of a computerized device and or other location or locations in the computerized device.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention for at least one of the questioning subjects the database may include data relating to one or more locations within a registry of a computerized device where data associated with the questioning subject is expected to be found. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention in addition to the data relating to one or more locations within a registry of a computerized device where data associated with the questioning subject is expected to be found the database may include data pointing to other locations within a computerized device for example outside the registry where data associated with the questioning subject is expected to be found. Such locations may include but are not limited to a computerized device s add remove list service list process list recent file used and elsewhere.

It should be noted that additional data which may be associated with one or with a group of questioning subjects may also be included in the questioning subjects database. Such data may include for example various unique characteristics associated with various questioning subjects an icon a description of the subject a category with which the subject may be associated with data relating to the information a specific registry key or registry value for example which may be found in the location within the computerized device which is associated with the questioning subject a permitted value s and or un permitted value s in the location within a computerized device which is associated with the questioning subject etc.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention as mentioned above as part of utilizing or utilizing the threads of the agentless module the questioning module may be adapted to configure each of the threads of the agentless module being utilized to cause one or more remote access processes to be invoked in a manner to remotely question without using agents at least a registry of one or more computerized devices assigned to that thread in accordance with one or more questioning subjects which have been assigned to that thread and which have been selected to be questioned on that or these computerized devices. One example of a remote access process which may be invoked by the threads of the agentless module to question at least the registries of the specified computerized devices may include one or more application programming interfaces API including an API capable of remotely questioning the registries of remote computerized devices. It will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art that various remote access processes including various APIs may be an integrated component of some operating systems sold on the market however other APIs may also be used. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the threads of the agentless module may invoke various APIs in a manner to question at least a registry of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects but possibly other locations such as for example an add remove list service list recent file used or an active process list within the computerized devices where data associated with the questioning subjects is expected to be found. It would be appreciated that the threads of the agentless module may be configured to invoke different remote access processes and various APIs in a manner to cause the remote access process to question various locations and or data sources on the specified computerized devices to be questioned.

For illustration in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention in case one of the threads of the agentless module determines that a registry API is to be used for questioning the registries of one or more of the computerized devices the agentless module may invoke the registry API. Next the thread of the agentless module may request the operating system to instruct the registry API to open a certain path key or library which is associated with a certain questioning subject. The thread of the agentless module may request the operating system to instruct the registry API to return to the device an indication relating to whether data is found or not in the specified location or the agentless module may request the operating system to instruct the registry API to return to the device an indication relating to the actual data found in the specified location.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to determine the number of threads of the agentless module to be utilized in parallel. The number of threads of the agentless module may be selected manually by a user or may be determined automatically in accordance with predefined parameters for example network performance or available bandwidth parameters. According to one embodiment of the present invention the questioning module may be preconfigured to utilize various numbers of threads of the agentless module and a user may select the desired number of threads of the agentless module for example by selecting the desired operation speed for example very slow slow medium high and very high .

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention once the questioning module determines the number of threads of the agentless module to be utilized in parallel the questioning module may be adapted to assign to each thread of the agentless module one or more of the specified computerized devices. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to determine which of the specified computerized devices is to be assigned to which thread of the agentless module and or what number of the specified computerized devices is to be assigned to each thread of the agentless module . In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the specified computerized devices to be questioned may be randomly and equally divided between the threads of the agentless module to be utilized. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the specified computerized devices to be questioned may be divided amongst the threads of the agentless module to be utilized in accordance with predefined rules and or based upon predefined parameters such as for example the amount of bandwidth available for communication from the device to a certain computerized device to be questioned and may not necessarily be equally divided among the threads of the agentless module . However the present invention is not limited in this respect and the questioning module may be configured to otherwise determine which of the specified computerized devices is to be assigned to which thread agentless module and or what number of the specified computerized devices is to be assigned to each thread of the agentless module . For example in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention the questioning module may be configured to substantially evenly divide the specified computerized devices to be questioned between all the threads of the agentless module which are to be utilized.

Reference is now made to in which there is shown an illustration of a table including an entry for each thread of the agentless module to be utilized and the data corresponding to the computerized device s and to the questioning subject s assigned to that thread according to some embodiments of the present invention. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention as part of the configuration of the agentless module the questioning module may be adapted to generate a table including an entry for each thread of the agentless module to be utilized as determined by the questioning module . In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention for each thread of the agentless module to be utilized the questioning module may be adapted to record in the table data corresponding to the computerized device s and to the questioning subject s assigned to that thread. The decision by the questioning module as to the number of threads of the agentless module to be utilized has been discussed above with greater detail. The decision by the questioning module as to which computerized device s and or as to which questioning subjects to assign to which thread of the agentless module may be arrived at in accordance with any predefined rules and or based upon any predefined parameters including but not limited to various equal distribution schemes.

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to record in the table for each thread of the agentless module data identifying the computerized devices to be questioned by that thread. The questioning module may be adapted to record in the table for each thread of the agentless module data directing to a specific location or locations on a remote computerized device where data corresponding to the questioning subjects assigned to that thread may be found on a computerized device. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may be adapted to record in the table for one or more threads of the agentless module data corresponding to one or more specific indications data or values which may be found in the specific location or locations and which if found in the specific location or locations may be for example indicative of a security threat. The questioning module may be adapted to record in the table for each thread of the agentless module any other data including but not limited to data which may be used by the agentless module to configure one or more of the remote access processes to remotely question one or more of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects to be questioned on the specified computerized devices.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention a table comprising an entry for each thread of the agentless module to be utilized may be created for each questioning process and may be temporarily stored on the storage medium . In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may use the data in the table to configure each thread of the agentless module with the data necessary for each agentless module to invoke and configure the remote access processes and to configure each of the processes to remotely question without using agents at least a registry of one or more of the computerized devices assigned to that thread of the agentless module in accordance with the questioning subjects to be questioned on that or these computerized devices.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention each thread of the agentless module may be adapted to use the data in the table such as the one shown in or in any other similar table to invoke and to configure one or more remote access processes to remotely question at least a registry of one of more of the computerized devices assigned to that thread in accordance with one or more of the questioning subjects selected to be questioned on that computerized device. The agentless module may include the necessary data for example the necessary logic needed to invoke and to configure one or more remote access process to question at least the registries of one or more computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects selected for the computerized device s . For example in case the remote access processes include one of the open APIs which are included as part of one of the Microsoft Windows operating systems the agentless module may include the necessary data or logic to enable one or more threads of the agentless module to invoke the API s and to configure the API s to remotely question one or more computerized devices in accordance with one or more questioning subjects. For example the agentless module may include the necessary data or logic to create a suitable query to cause an API to generate a remote scanning process for questioning one or more computerized devices in accordance with one or more questioning subjects. It would be appreciated that according to some embodiments of the present invention the invocation and the configuration of the remote access process may be part of the same action.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention a plurality of threads of the agentless module may invoke the remote access process es simultaneously. For example each thread may generate one or more queries intended to cause a remote access process to remotely and without using agents question at least the registry of a computerized device in accordance with one or more of the questioning subjects devices to be questioned on that computerized device and which have been assigned to that thread. The plurality of queries from the plurality of threads agentless module may cause a plurality of remote access processes to be invoked. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the plurality of queries from the plurality of threads agentless module may cause the plurality of the remote access processes to question in parallel and without using agents at least the registries of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects selected for the specified computerized devices.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention one or more of the queries may be created by one or more of the remote access processes in a manner to cause the data stored in one or more predefined locations within each of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects selected for that computerized device to be retrieved. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention at least one of the queries may be configured in a manner to cause one or more of the remote access process es to question one or more predefined locations within the registries of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects selected for that computerized device. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention one or more of the remote access process es may be configured in a manner to compare the data or value stored in a specific location within one or more of the computerized device s against a predefined value or predefined data.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the queries may be configured to cause the remote access processes to question one or more predefined locations within each of the specified computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subjects selected for that computerized device. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the queries may be created in a manner to cause data corresponding to the results of the questioning of each of the computerized devices to be returned to the device for example to the questioning module . In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the results may relate to each questioning subject which was questioned on each of the computerized devices.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention as part of the questioning process the remote access processes may create one or more of the queries in a manner to cause data corresponding to the data found or the lack of thereof within the designated locations in the specified computerized devices to be returned in accordance with the questioning subjects questioned on the computerized devices. The returned data corresponding to the data found within the computerized devices in accordance with the questioning subject questioned on the computerized devices may be received at device block for example at the questioning module . The handling of the data received from the computerized devices in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention shall be described in detail hereinbelow.

According to some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module may include a results analysis module . In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the results analysis module may be adapted to receive the queries results received at device in response to the queries. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the results analysis module may be adapted to collect some or all of the results of the queries and may generate a report including various data corresponding to the results. The report may include various details regarding the queries results for example it may include one or more entries each including details regarding the data found on a specified computerized device in a specific location associated with a certain questioning subject questioned on that computerized device. The report may include additional data such as for example data relating to the computerized device associated with a certain result and or the questioning subject associated with a certain result as well as additional data. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the report may include only data relating to queries results which were not in compliance with one or more conditions associated with one or more questioning subjects with which the queries were associated. Any technique may be used to generate the reports and the reports may be in many formats and in many forms.

In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the data corresponding to the queries results may initially undergo processing and the processed data may be used to generate the report. For example data relating to the existence non existence of data in certain location s within certain computerized devices may be compared against predefined rules correlated with the questioning subjects associated with the data for example in accordance with rules which specify in which locations within the computerized devices data is allowed to be stored and in which data is not allowed. In this case if data is found where it is indicated to not be allowed the report may include an indication to that effect but otherwise no reference may appear in the report. However the present invention is not limited in this respect as any other rules may be applied to the queries results.

In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the questioning module and in particular the results analyses module may store specific records from the results report or the results report in its entirety. As part of storing the results the results analysis module may record for each result a timestamp corresponding to the time at which the result was received. The results analyses module may compare the results of each report with the results of any one or more previous reports. In accordance with further embodiments of the present invention the results analysis module may store for each computerized device the results of the questioning of that device. The results may thus for example reflect the activity on one or more of the devices which were questioned over a certain period of time.

Furthermore in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the queries results may be analyzed by the results analysis module and based on the results of the analysis the results analysis module may be adapted to execute one or more predefined actions or not for example in case one or more of the results is not in compliance with one or more predefined rules. In accordance with some embodiments of the present invention one or more of the rules may relate to previous data fond or not found in the remote computerized device. Some examples of rules which may be used to analyze the results may include but are not limited to rules relating to the existence of data in a certain location s the removal of data in a certain location s the addition of data in a certain location s regarding the type and or the value of the data in a specific location s etc. The actions which may be executed by the results analysis module may include for example sending an email message to a user using a certain computerized device disconnecting a certain computerized device from the organizational network shutting down a certain process removing a certain application etc. Furthermore in accordance with some embodiments of the present invention the results analysis module may be adapted to utilize one or more threads of the agentless module to invoke one or more remote access process es for example the ones used to question the specified computers and to configure the remote access process es to modify write overwrite modify delete etc certain data on a remote computerized device. For example the results analysis module may be adapted to utilize one or more threads of the agentless module to invoke one or more remote access process es and to configure the remote access process to write new data in a specific location on one or more computerized devices e.g. the computerized devices which were questioned and which have been determined to include data which is not in compliance with the predefined rules.

While certain features of the invention have been illustrated and described herein many modifications substitutions changes and equivalents will occur to those skilled in the art. It is therefore to be understood that the appended claims are intended to cover all such modifications and changes as fall within the true scope of the invention.

