---

title: Method and system for increasing holographic data storage capacity using irradiance-tailoring element
abstract: A method and system is disclosed for increasing the holographic storage capacity of a holographic recording medium using an irradiance-tailoring (e.g., optical) element by changing the irradiance profile of the modulated object beam (e.g., by imparting motion to an irradiance-tailoring element and/or the holographic recording medium and/or by reconfiguring (e.g., periodically) the phase profile of a stationary irradiance-tailoring (e.g., optical) element) to minimize the effects of fixed-pattern noise buildup from occurring in the holographic recording medium.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07813017&OS=07813017&RS=07813017
owner: InPhase Technologies, Inc.
number: 07813017
owner_city: Longmont
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051229
---
This application makes reference to and claims the benefit of the following U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 728 768 filed Oct. 21 2005. The entire disclosure and contents of the foregoing Provisional Application is hereby incorporated by reference.

The United States Government has rights in this invention pursuant to Award Contract No. 70NANB3H3031 between InPhase Technologies and the National Institute of Science Technology NIST .

The present invention relates generally to a method and system for increasing the holographic storage capacity of a holographic recording medium using an irradiance tailoring element by changing the irradiance profile of the modulated data beam to thereby minimize the effects of fixed pattern noise buildup from occurring in a holographic recording medium. The present invention further relates generally to a method and system for changing the irradiance profile of a relayed modulated data beam to thereby minimize the effects of fixed pattern noise buildup in the holographic recording medium

Developers of information storage devices and methods continue to seek increased storage capacity. As part of this development page wise memory systems in particular holographic systems have been suggested as alternatives to conventional memory devices. Holographic systems typically involve the storage and readout of entire pages of information these pages consisting of arrayed patterns representing information. In general a holographic system stores in three dimensions holographic representations of the pages as patterns of varying refractive index and or absorption imprinted into a storage medium.

Holographic systems are characterized by their high density storage potential and the potential speed at which the stored information is randomly accessed and retrieved. In fact because information is typically manipulated i.e. stored and retrieved on a page by page basis the speed of storage and retrieval compares favorably to conventional magnetic disk or compact disk storage systems. A significant advantage of holographic systems however is storage capacity. It is possible for each page stored as a holographic image to contain thousands or even millions of elements. Theoretically it is believed that at the present time up to 10bits of information are storable in approximately 1.0 cmof holographic storage medium.

The page wise systems of holographic systems involve the storage and readout of an entire two dimensional representation e.g. a page of data Typically recording light passes through a two dimensional array of dark and transparent areas representing data and the holographic system stores in three dimensions holographic representations of the pages as patterns of varying refractive index imprinted into a storage medium. Holographic systems are discussed generally in Psaltis et al. Holographic Memories November 1995.

The capabilities of typical holographic recording systems are determined in part by the storage medium. One type of holographic recording media used recently for such systems are photosensitive polymer films. See e.g. Smothers et al. Photopolymers for Holography Los Angeles Calif. 1990 pp. 1212 03. The holographic recording media described in Smothers et al. supra contain a photoimageable system containing a liquid monomer material the photoactive monomer and a photoinitiator which promotes the polymerization of the monomer upon exposure to light where the photoimageable system is in an organic polymer host matrix that is substantially inert to the exposure light. During writing recording of information into the material by passing recording light through an array representing data the monomer polymerizes in the exposed regions. Due to the lowering of the monomer concentration caused by the polymerization monomer from the dark unexposed regions of the material diffuses to the exposed regions. The polymerization and resulting diffusion create a refractive index change thus forming the holographic grating hologram representing the data.

Photosensitive polymer films are considered attractive recording media candidates for high density holographic data storage. These films have a relatively low cost are easily processed and can be designed to have large index contrasts with high photosensitivity. These films can also be fabricated with the dynamic range media thickness optical quality and dimensional stability required for high density applications. See L. Dhar et al. Recording Media That Exhibit High Dynamic Range for Holographic Storage 24 1999 pp. 487 et seq. seq.

A technique for increasing data storage capacity is multiplexing holograms. Multiplexing holograms involves storing multiple holograms in a media often in the same volume or nearly the same volume of the media. Typically this is carried out by varying an angle wavelength phase code or some other system parameter in the recording and readout setup of the holograms. Many of these methods rely on a holographic phenomenon known as the Bragg effect to separate the holograms even though they are physically located within the same volume of media. Other multiplexing methods such as shift and to some extent correlation use the Bragg effect and relative motion of the media and input laser beams to overlap multiple holograms in the same volume of the media.

At least two fundamental factors typically govern the amount of data that can be holographically stored in a given volume of the holographic recording medium. First the volume of the holographic recording medium required for the data and reference signal beams to interfere determines the number of discrete optical recording sectors allowed across the surface of a given area of the medium. Second the number of data images that can be stored in a single volumetric sector of the holographic recording medium determines the local density of the data. Thus in order to maximize the data capacity for any volumetric sector of the holographic recording medium the combined volume of the object and reference beams should be minimized while the number of holograms is maximized.

One method available to reduce the volume of the holographic recording medium exposed during recording is to use a strong lens e.g. Fourier Transform lens to focus the modulated data beam into the center of the thickness or volume of the recording medium. This method enables equal and minimally sized irradiance profiles to be incident upon both surfaces of the medium. The undesired side effect of using a focused beam centered in the volume of the holographic recording medium is that local areas of extremely high energy irradiance are created which in turn over expose and distort the recording medium to the detriment of high fidelity holographic recording. Such strong intensity or irradiance concentrations the most detrimental of which are often localized along the center of the focused beam have particularly negative implications for holographic recording approaches that multiplex many holograms in the same spatial location such as angular multiplexing or correlation multiplexing.

Methods exist to mitigate these undesired effects that occur as a result of focusing the object beam into the center of the volume of the holographic recording medium. These methods include shift multiplexing reducing the number of multiplexed holograms reducing the energy in the data beam or using a stationary or fixed phase mask to minimize the coherent addition of pixels at the Fourier plane of the focused data beam. See for example U.S. Pat. No. 5 510 912 Blaum et al. issued Apr. 23 1996 and U.S. Pat. No. 5 727 226 Blaum et al. issued Mar. 10 1998 which use stationary or fixed phase masks. All of these methods may negatively and dramatically impact the available storage capacity of the holographic recording medium.

What may be the most dramatic example of a non uniform irradiance distribution occurs when a holographic storage system uses an amplitude data modulator to modulate data onto the optical beam with the hologram then being recorded in the Fourier plane of the modulator. A Fourier plane recording occurs when there is a lens that focuses the information from the data modulator into the recording medium. In this particular instance every pixel adds coherently at the very center of the Fourier distribution thus often leading to what is commonly referred to as a Direct Current DC hot spot. The irradiance intensity of this DC hot spot may be as much as six orders of magnitude higher than the surrounding data. The focused portion of the data beam known as the beam waist represents the smallest area of the focused beam that may be achieved and is therefore the data beam location where the highest bit density often occurs. The focal length of the lens and the pixel size determine the smallest area of the focused beam that may be achieved as defined by the equation D 2 f where D is the diameter of the beam waist at the focus is the wavelength of the beam f is the focal length of the lens and is the pixel diameter.

There have been very few methods developed to decrease this DC hot spot effect. The most common method uses a phase mask on the modulator that scrambles the phase of the pixels so that they do not constructively add at the center of the Fourier plane. Common variations of a phase mask may include binary pixel matched phase masks multilevel pixel matched phase masks and axicons. See Psaltis et al. 2000 for a summary of research on these types of phase masks. Because of the difficulty in aligning a pixel matched phase mask to an amplitude data modulator the practicality of using such a phase mask is questionable.

Another approach uses a phase shifting element composed of linear variations to provide a non pixel matched solution to this problem. See U.S. Pat. No. 6 281 993 Bernal et al. issued Aug. 28 2001. This phase shifting element includes an axicon or a phase shifting device that consists of a plurality of prismatic elements. These prismatic elements have linear features and as such these elements contain discontinuities. These discontinuities are difficult to manufacture and may also result in a potential loss of data when the discontinuity occurs in the middle of a pixel. Where an axicon is used there is only one discontinuity minimizing the effect. Instead the axicon causes the DC component of the irradiance profile to become donut shaped which is not an ideal way to smooth the irradiance profile in the focus plane.

Continuous random phase masks disclosed in D. G. Esaev Continuous Random Phase Mask 1977 9 1150 1152 involving continuous random phase pixels may accomplish smoothing of the irradiance profile in the focus plane. See also A. Iwamoto Artificial Diffuser for Fourier Transform Hologram recording Appl. Optics 1980 19 215 220 which discloses a phase mask of random pixels but where the phase variation is of a higher spatial frequency features smaller than the pixels than the data pixels and where the phase variation is continuous and smooth rather than having discrete steps. However the phase pixels in both these masks have the same alignment registration and interference difficulties as the two and multiple level masks.

Continuously varying phase masks may be used in a holographic data storage system to create a similar effect to that of pixel matched phase masks without the strict alignment requirement and enabling imaging onto the data modulator without the need to match pixels. However one detrimental effect in using these phase masks in holographic recording is that for a fixed position of the phase mask location the irradiance profile of the beam passing through the phase mask still has a constant pattern even though the irradiance profile of the data modulator is relatively random. When relayed or focused into holographic media with a lens or lenses a patterned irradiance distribution may build up an index profile in the media because the media is inherently sensitive to variations in irradiance. This buildup may lead to non uniformities scatter media distortions and other detrimental effects.

These detrimental irradiance concentration effects also vary depending on the optical characteristics of the holographic recording system such as the aberrations present in the optical system aberrations induced by the incident angle between the recording beams and the recording medium and intensity non uniformities in the illumination beams. The precise irradiance profiles may also vary based on system design but the repeated exposure of any static irradiance profile even when the data beam is modulated will build up a refractive index profile which is the autocorrelation of the static irradiance profile. This undesired refractive index profile ultimately results in the degradation of the recording fidelity of the medium.

Accordingly it would be desirable to provide a holographic recording method and or system that is able to 1 minimize the recording medium volume required for the object and reference beams to interfere 2 maximize the data capacity in any volumetric sector of the recording medium 3 avoid or minimize over exposure distortion and other detrimental effects in the holographic recording medium even when multiplexing many holograms in the same spatial location 4 maintain a close ratio in power density between the object and reference beams and or 5 minimize the alignment tolerance issues of phase masks.

According to a fourth broad aspect of the present invention there is provided a holographic recording system comprising 

It is advantageous to define several terms before describing the invention. It should be appreciated that the following definitions are used throughout this application.

Where the definition of terms departs from the commonly used meaning of the term applicant intends to utilize the definitions provided below unless specifically indicated.

For the purposes of the present invention the term light source refers to any source of electromagnetic radiation of any wavelength for example from a laser etc. Suitable light sources for use in embodiments of the methods and systems of the present invention include but are not limited to those obtained by conventional laser sources e.g. the blue and green lines of Ar 458 488 514 nm and He Cd lasers 442 nm the green line of frequency doubled YAG lasers 532 nm and the red lines of He Ne 633 nm Kr lasers 647 and 676 nm and various diode lasers 290 to 900 nm .

For the purposes of the present invention the term photoinitiating light source refers to a light source that activates a photoinitiator a photoactive polymerizable material or both in a holographic recording medium to cause a holographic recording in the medium. Photoiniating light sources include recording light etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term spatial light intensity refers to a light intensity distribution or pattern of varying light intensity within a given volume of space.

For the purposes of the present invention the terms holographic grating holograph or hologram collectively and interchangeably referred to hereafter as hologram are used in the conventional sense of referring to an interference pattern formed when a signal beam and a reference beam interfere with each other. In cases wherein digital data is recorded the signal beam may be encoded with a data modulator e.g. a spatial light modulator etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term holographic recording refers to the act of recording a hologram in a holographic recording medium.

For the purposes of the present invention the term multiplexing holograms refers to recording storing etc. a plurality of holograms in the same volume or nearly the same volume of the holographic recording medium by varying a recording parameter s including but not limited to angle wavelength phase code shift correlation peristrophic etc. The multiplexed holograms that are recorded stored etc. may be read retrieved etc. by using the same recording parameter s used to record store etc. the respective holograms.

For the purposes of the present invention the term holographic recording medium refers to a component material etc. that is capable of recording and storing in three dimensions i.e. the X Y and Z dimensions one or more holograms as one or more pages as patterns of varying refractive index imprinted into the medium. Examples of holographic recording media useful in embodiments of the methods and systems of the present invention include but are not limited to those described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 103 454 Dhar et al. issued Aug. 15 2000 U.S. Pat. No. 6 482 551 Dhar et al. issued Nov. 19 2002 U.S. Pat. No. 6 650 447 Curtis et al. issued Nov. 18 2003 U.S. Pat. No. 6 743 552 Setthachayanon et al. issued Jun. 1 2004 U.S. Pat. No. 6 765 061 Dhar et al. Jul. 20 2004 U.S. Pat. No. 6 780 546 Trentler et al. issued Aug. 24 2004 U.S. Patent Application No. 2003 0206320 published Nov. 6 2003 Cole et al and U.S. Patent Application No. 2004 0027625 published Feb. 12 2004 the entire contents and disclosures of which are herein incorporated by reference.

For the purposes of the present invention the term data page or page refers to the conventional meaning of data page as used with respect to holography. For example a data page may be a page of data i.e. two dimensional assembly of data one or more pictures etc. to be recorded in a holographic recording medium.

For the purposes of the present invention the term recording light refers to a light source used to record into a holographic recording medium. The spatial light intensity pattern of the recording light is what is recorded.

For the purposes of the present invention the term recording data refers to storing holographic representations of one or more pages as patterns of varying refractive index.

For the purposes of the present invention the term reading data refers to retrieving or recovering data stored as holographic representations.

For the purposes of the present invention the term data modulator refers to any device that is capable of optically representing data in one or two dimensions from a signal beam.

For the purposes of the present invention the term spatial light modulator refers to a data modulator device that is an electronically controlled active optical element.

For the purposes of the present invention the term irradiance profile refers to a two dimensional X Y mapping of the power density of light. As used herein the term irradiance profile is synonymous and interchangeable with the term irradiance concentration. 

For the purposes of the present invention the term high energy irradiance refers to a localized irradiance of light of particularly high intensity.

For the purposes of the present invention the term static irradiance profile refers to an irradiance profile that does not change over time.

For the purposes of the present invention the term refractive index profile refers to a two dimensional X Y mapping of the refractive index pattern recorded in a holographic recording medium.

For the purposes of the present invention the term object beam refers to a recording beam containing a data signal. As used herein the term data modulated beam refers to an object beam that has been modulated by a modulator such as a spatial light modulator SLM .

For the purposes of the present invention the terms contact and contacting refer to any manner in which the object beam touches an element for example an irradiance tailoring element a data modulator a lens etc. The terms contact contacting include but are not limited to the terms illuminate illuminating pass passing reflect reflecting etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the terms relay relayed and similar terms refer to any optical element or combination of optical elements that transfer e.g. transmit reflect etc. the object beam from a data modulator towards the holographic recording medium. Relaying devices include but are not limited to a lens or lenses that focuses the data beam towards e.g. into or proximate to the center of the holographic recording medium a lens or lenses that images the data beam towards e.g. into or proximate the center of the holographic recording medium a lens or lenses that magnifies or demagnifies the image of the data beam towards e.g. into or proximate the center of the holographic recording medium etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term focused data beam refers to an object beam that is focused by a lens or lenses e.g. a Fourier Transform lens to converge the beam and reduce the size of the recording volume of the beam.

For the purposes of the present invention the term focal point refers to the point where the focused data beam converges to its narrowest area commonly known as the beam waist . When recording a hologram the focal point may occur before onto into or after the holographic recording medium.

For the purposes of the present invention the term optical element refers to any component or plurality of components that affect the phase of the light including but not limited to the spatial location of the light the angle of the light etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term reflective optical element refers to an optical element that reflects incident light.

For the purposes of the present invention the term transmissive optical element refers to an optical element that allows incident light to pass therethrough.

For the purposes of the present invention the term irradiance tailoring refers to any method system element etc. or combination thereof that alters the irradiance profile of light including but not limited to caustic shaping spatial changes in the caustic changing the intensity pattern of the caustic etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term irradiance tailoring benefits refers to beneficial results output etc. obtained by altering the irradiance profile of light including but not limited to minimizing the effects fixed pattern noise buildup e.g. fixed pattern autocorrelations from occurring in a holographic recording medium.

For the purposes of the present invention the term irradiance tailoring element refers to any element e.g. optical element etc. that alters the irradiance profile of the light at any point downstream of the element for example a caustic shaping optic element a holographic optical element a phase mask a phase modulator etc. The irradiance tailoring element may also comprise random non linear features that are larger than a pixel of the data modulator onto which the data beam is imaged and having relatively smoother features compared to prismatic elements with minimal or no discontinuities compared to prismatic elements having linear features disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 281 993 Bernal et al. issued Aug. 28 2001 so that the element does not require alignment of any feature relative to any pixels on the data modulator.

For the purposes of the present invention the term caustic refers to the enveloping surface formed by light rays refracting from a curved surface e.g. of the optical element .

For the purposes of the present invention the term caustic shaping refers to the act of altering the properties e.g. width length intensity distribution or mapping etc. of the caustic of a focused beam.

For the purposes of the present invention the term caustic shaping optical element refers to an optical element that alters the properties of the caustic of a focused beam.

For the purposes of the present invention the terms reconfigurable and reconfigure refer to the ability of an element e.g. optical element etc. to actively alter its irradiance e.g. caustic tailoring pattern.

For the purposes of the present invention the term periodically reconfigurable refers to the ability to actively alter the irradiance e.g. caustic tailoring pattern over time.

For the purposes of the present invention the term reconfigurable irradiance tailoring element refers to an element e.g. optical element etc. that possesses the ability to actively alter its irradiance e.g. caustic tailoring pattern.

For the purposes of the present invention the term periodically reconfigurable irradiance tailoring element refers to an element e.g. optical element etc. that possesses the ability to actively alter its irradiance e.g. caustic tailoring pattern over time.

For the purposes of the present invention the term altering the phase profile of a stationary element refers to the ability to change the refractive index pattern of an element e.g. optical element etc. without physically moving the element.

For the purposes of the present invention the term changing the irradiance profile means actively changing the irradiance profile one or more times e.g. other than by just using a fixed or stationary phase mask and other than solely by using a data modulator. The irradiance profile may be changed by imparting motion e.g. at irregular intervals periodic intervals continuously etc. to the irradiance tailoring element and or the holographic recording medium by reconfiguring e.g. at irregular or periodic intervals the phase profile of a stationary irradiance tailoring element etc. or any combination thereof. In some embodiments of the method and system of the present invention the irradiance profile may be changed a plurality of times may be changed at irregular or sporadic intervals at regular or periodic intervals continuously etc. or any combination thereof. The irradiance profile may be changed prior to recording a hologram during the recording of a hologram between the recording of a plurality of holograms etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term noise refers to any undesirable optical signal that may cause a loss in the desired fidelity of the signal including but not limited to fixed pattern autocorrelation noise noise induced from media index distortions that are a response from the irregular irradiance distribution noise induced by an increase in scatter due to the recording medium s index response etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the terms self correlation and autocorrection refer to a shared or common irradiance profile of otherwise separate discrete holograms resulting from a shared or common source effect e.g. irradiance profile etc. .

For the purposes of the present invention the term fixed pattern autocorrelation refers to an autocorrelation resulting from an irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element for which the irradiance tailoring pattern does not change over time.

For the purposes of the present invention the term effects of fixed pattern noise buildup refers to the accumulation of accrual of increase of etc. of fixed pattern noise effects over time including but not limited to media distortions fixed pattern autocorrelations etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term minimizes the effects of fixed pattern noise buildup means that these fixed pattern noise buildup effects e.g. fixed pattern autocorrelations are reduced decreased lessened diminished lowered attenuated curtailed eliminated eradicated etc.

For the purposes of the present invention the term spatial optical phase profile refers to an irradiance tailoring pattern unique to a particular or specific irradiance tailoring element.

For the purposes of the present invention the term motion with reference to the irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element and or holographic recording medium refers to linear motion e.g. one dimensional linear translation rotational motion e.g. in an arc circle oval etc. orthogonal to the optical axis i.e. the axis along or parallel to the path of the light that may be continuous may include pauses when recording hologram may include pauses between recordings of holograms may be at irregular or sporadic intervals may be at regular or periodic intervals etc. or any combination thereof. The amount of motion imparted may depend on the particular irradiance tailoring element used the number of holograms recorded the type of holographic recording medium used the intensity of object reference beams etc. and may be a slight movement e.g. on the order of microns.

For the purposes of the present invention the term phase conjugate configuration refers to a holographic data storage system design wherein a hologram is read out in such a way or manner that the read out signal back propagates through part or all of the optical elements that condition the object beam.

For the purposes of the present invention the term holographic optical element HOE refers to an element that functions by diffracting light from a generalized holographic grating structure.

For the purposes of the present invention the term data fidelity refers to the quality of the stored data and often the ability to effectively and accurately recover the stored data.

The present invention is directed broadly at embodiments of a method and system for increasing holographic storage capacity of a holographic recording medium while avoiding or minimizing over exposure distortion and other detrimental effects in the holographic recording medium even when multiplexing many holograms in the same spatial location or volume. Even when irradiance tailoring e.g. caustic shaping elements are used to alter the irradiance pattern of the object beam it has been discovered that the effects of fixed pattern noise buildup e.g. media distortions fixed pattern autocorrelations etc. may occur from undesired irradiance or intensity concentrations in the object beam e.g. by focusing the object beam on the thickness center of the holographic recording medium Given a sufficient number of holograms this irradiance or intensity autocorrelation will give rise to a fixed pattern in the index of refraction that accumulates and can destroy the signal to noise ratio for each hologram. Regardless of the multiplexing technique angle spatial shift peristrophic etc. used these irradiance concentrations will accumulate as the number of recorded holograms increases and eventually the quality of all recorded holograms may be compromised and degraded.

Embodiments of the method and system of the present invention are based on the further discovery that these detrimental irradiance or intensity autocorrelation and irradiance concentration accumulation effects can be avoided or minimized by changing the irradiance profile of the modulated object beam for example by 1 imparting motion to the irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element and or the holographic recording medium or 2 changing or reconfiguring e.g. periodically the phase profile or irradiance pattern of a stationary or fixed irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element to cause a dynamic irradiance tailoring effect by the element. Through the use for example of motion imparted to the irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element and or the holographic recording medium or reconfiguring e.g. periodically the phase profile irradiance pattern of the element a data modulated beam may be successfully focused for example onto or into a holographic recording medium so that the impacts of any undesired irradiance concentrations are greatly minimized reduced or avoided. Embodiments of the method and system of the present invention that change the irradiance profile of the modulated data beam for example by imparting motion to the irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element and or holographic recording medium or using a stationary irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element that has its phase profile reconfigured e.g. periodically may dramatically reduce the auto correlation of the static irradiance profile thereby greatly improving the data fidelity of the recorded holograms. Embodiments of the method and system of the present invention may also be employed in a variety of configurations appropriate for any number of holographic recording method or system designs.

The embodiments of the method and system of the present invention alter or modify the basic holographic system by using an irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element and changing the irradiance profile of the modulated object beam by for example imparting motion to the irradiance tailoring element the holographic recording medium or both during the recording process either between exposures or during and between exposures. Alternatively a fixed or stationary irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element whose spatial e.g. optical phase profile is reconfigured e.g. periodically through for example control signals may be employed in modified system to achieve the same or similar irradiance tailoring benefits. This imparted motion or by dynamic altering of the phase profile of a stationary fixed irradiance tailoring e.g. optical element significantly reduces for example the fixed pattern autocorrelations arising from undesired irradiance or intensity concentrations in the object beam and thereby minimizes the effects of this fixed pattern noise buildup from occurring in the holographic recording medium. The slight shift of the irradiance pattern that is created by the various embodiments of the method and system of the present invention for example between recording each hologram or any number of holograms results in a reduction of the pattern s strength and consequently far more holograms of higher quality may be combined in a single location volume of the holographic recording medium.

The various embodiments of the present invention are illustrated by reference to the drawings. Referring to five schematic designs of alternative embodiments of the method and system of the present invention are shown.

Referring to the schematic design in more specifically and in greater detail system comprises an input object beam in some embodiments a collimated input beam indicated as that may pass through transmissive or be reflected by reflective an irradiance tailoring optical element in the form of for example a caustic shaping optical element indicated as . As represented by the symbols collectively indicated as this optical element may be subjected to either linear and or rotational motion for example by linear or rotary stages driven for example by stepper discrete or DC servo motors continuous or may have its phase profile or irradiance pattern changed or reconfigured e.g. periodically while in a stationary or fixed position to provide irradiance tailoring benefits. The object beam indicated as that is phase or spatially shifted by element is then spatially mapped e.g. relayed by for example a standard e.g. a 1 1 ratio imaging telescope as beam onto a data modulator either transmissive or reflective such as a spatial light modulator SLM indicated as so as to achieve the imaging condition of SLM as may be needed or appropriate for recording. A modulated beam indicated as from SLM is then focused by a storage lens e.g. a Fourier Transform lens as a converging cone shaped focused data beam into a holographic recording medium at a focal point of data beam e.g. at the middle of the thickness of medium and then expands as a diverging cone shaped beam . As represented by the motion symbols collectively indicated as medium may also be subjected to linear and or rotational motion to provide irradiance tailoring benefits.

Referring to the schematic design in more specifically and in greater detail system comprises an input object beam in some embodiments a collimated input beam indicated as that is projected onto a stationary or fixed irradiance tailoring optical element in the form of for example a caustic shaping optical element indicated as that is combined with a data modulator such as a spatial light modulator SLM indicated as . Element and SLM comprise a single unit or assembly wherein element and SLM are often both transmissive or element or SLM may be reflective. A modulated beam indicated as from SLM is then focused by a storage lens e.g. Fourier Transform lens as a converging cone shaped focused data beam into the holographic recording medium at a focal point of data beam e.g. at the middle of the thickness of medium and then expands as a diverging cone shaped beam indicated by . As represented by the motion symbols collectively indicated as medium may be subjected to linear and or rotational motion to provide irradiance tailoring benefits. If medium is not subjected to linear and or rotational motion element may alternatively have its phase profile or irradiance pattern changed or reconfigured e.g. periodically to provide the irradiance tailoring benefits. Additionally any combination of linear and or rotational motion imparted to medium with a e.g. periodic change or reconfiguration of element s phase profile or irradiance pattern may be used in system to provide similar irradiance tailoring benefits.

Referring to the schematic design in more specifically and in greater detail system comprises an input object beam in some embodiments a collimated input beam indicated as that may pass through transmissive or be reflected by reflective a data modulator such as a spatial light modulator SLM indicated as and may then be transmitted or reflected as modulated beam by an irradiance tailoring optical element in the form of for example a caustic shaping optical element indicated as . As represented by the symbols collectively indicated as this optical element may be subjected to either linear and or rotational motion or may have its phase profile or irradiance pattern changed or reconfigured e.g. periodically while in a stationary or fixed position to provide irradiance tailoring benefits. The shifted and modulated object beam indicated as that is projected from optical element is then focused by a storage lens e.g. a Fourier Transform lens as a converging cone shaped focused data beam into the holographic recording medium at a focal point of data beam e.g. at the middle of the thickness of medium and then expands as a diverging cone shaped beam indicated by . As represented by the motion symbols collectively indicated as medium may also be subjected to linear and or rotational motion to provide irradiance tailoring benefits.

Referring to the schematic design in more specifically and in greater detail system comprises an input object beam in some embodiments a collimated input beam indicated as that may pass through transmissive or be reflected by reflective a data modulator such as a spatial light modulator SLM indicated as and may then be transmitted or reflected as modulated beam by an irradiance tailoring optical element in the form of for example a caustic shaping optical element indicated as . As represented by the symbols collectively indicated as this optical element may be subjected to either linear and or rotational motion or may have its phase profile or irradiance pattern changed or reconfigured e.g. periodically while in a stationary or fixed position to provide irradiance tailoring benefits. The shifted and modulated object beam indicated as that is projected from optical element is then focused by a storage lens e.g. a Fourier Transform lens as a converging cone shaped focused data beam into the holographic recording medium at a focal point of data beam e.g. at the middle of the thickness of medium and then expands as a diverging cone shaped beam indicated by . As represented by the motion symbols collectively indicated as medium may also be subjected to linear and or rotational motion to provide irradiance tailoring benefits.

Referring to the schematic design in more specifically and in greater detail system comprises an input object beam in the form of a collimated Bragg matched input object beam indicated as that may pass through transmissive or be reflected by reflective an irradiance tailoring element in the form of a holographic optical element HOE indicated as . As represented by the symbols collectively indicated as HOE may be subjected to either linear and or rotational motion to provide irradiance tailoring benefits. The object beam indicated as that is phase or spatially shifted by HOE may then be spatially mapped e.g. relayed onto a data modulator either transmissive or reflective such as a spatial light modulator SLM indicated as so as to satisfy the imaging condition of SLM needed or appropriate for recording. A modulated beam indicated as from SLM is then focused by a storage lens e.g. a Fourier Transform lens as a converging cone shaped focused data beam onto the holographic recording medium at a focal point of data beam e.g. at the middle of the thickness of medium and then expands as a diverging cone shaped beam . As represented by the motion symbols collectively indicated as medium may also be subjected to linear and or rotational motion to provide irradiance tailoring benefits.

It should be appreciated that the embodiments illustrated in are provided to illustrate the teachings of the present invention. Alterations or modification within the skill of the art of the embodiments in are considered within the scope of the present invention so long as these alterations or modifications operate in a same or similar manner way function etc. achieve the same or similar benefits results effects etc.

All documents patents journal articles and other materials cited in the present application are hereby incorporated by reference.

Although the present invention has been fully described in conjunction with several embodiments thereof with reference to the accompanying drawings it is to be understood that various changes and modifications may be apparent to those skilled in the art. Such changes and modifications are to be understood as included within the scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims unless they depart therefrom.

