---

title: Reconstituted histone methyltransferase complex and methods of identifying modulators thereof
abstract: The present invention provides a reconstituted complex including EED, EZH2 and SUZ12 wherein the reconstituted complex has histone methyltransferase (HMTase) activity for lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3-K27). The reconstituted complex may further include RbAp48, AEBP2 or both. Also disclosed are methods of producing the reconstituted complex, methods of identifying compounds that inhibit the HTMase activity of the reconstituted complex and methods of identifying candidate compounds for treating cancer. Reagents and kits including the reconstituted complex are further provided.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07563589&OS=07563589&RS=07563589
owner: The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
number: 07563589
owner_city: Chapel Hill
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050527
---
This application claims the benefit of priority from U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 575 880 filed Jun. 1 2004 which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

This invention was made in part with government support under grant numbers GM68804 and 5 R01 GM63067 01 from the National Institutes of Health. The U.S. Government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to a reconstituted histone methyltransferase complex and methods of identifying modulators thereof.

Polycomb group PcG and trithorax group trxG proteins are known to be part of the cellular memory system Francis and Kingston 2001 2 409 421 Simon and Tamkun 2002 12 210 218 . Both groups of proteins are involved in maintaining the spatial patterns of homeotic box Hox gene expression which are established early in embryonic development by transiently expressed segmentation genes. In general PcG proteins are transcriptional repressors that maintain the off state and trxG proteins are transcriptional activators that maintain the on state. As members of PcG and trxG proteins contain intrinsic histone methyltransferase HMTase activity PcG and trxG proteins may participate in cellular memory through methylation of core histones Beisel et al. 2002 419 857 862 Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Czermin et al. 2002 111 185 196 Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 2905 Milne et al. 2002 10 1107 1117 Muller et al. 2002 111 197 208 Nakamura et al. 2002 10 1119 1128 .

Biochemical and genetic studies have provided evidence that PcG proteins function in at least two distinct protein complexes the Polycomb repressive complex 1 PRC1 and the ESC E Z complex although the compositions of the complexes may be dynamic Otte and Kwaks 2003 13 448 454 . Studies in Czermin et al. 2002 111 185 196 Muller et al. 2002 111 197 208 and mammalian cells Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 2905 have demonstrated that the ESC E Z EED EZH2 complexes have intrinsic histone methyltransferase activity. Although the compositions of the complexes isolated by different groups are slightly different they generally contain EED EZH2 SUZ12 and RbAp48 or homologs thereof.

In addition to Hox gene silencing EED EZH2 mediated histone H3 K27 methylation has been shown to participate in X inactivation Plath et al. 2003 300 131 135 Silva et al. 2003 4 481495 . Recruitment of the EED EZH2 complex to Xi and subsequent trimethylation on histone H3 K27 occurs during the initiation stage of X inactivation and is dependent on Xist RNA. Furthermore EZH2 and its associated histone H3 K27 methyltransferase activity was found to differentially mark the pluripotent epiblast cells and the differentiated trophectoderm Erhardt et al. 2003 130 4235 4248 . Consistent with a role of EZH2 in maintaining the epigenetic modification patterns of pluripotent epiblast cells Cre mediated deletion of EZH2 results in loss of histone H3 K27 methylation in these cells Erhardt et al. 2003 130 4235 4248 . Further studies in prostate and breast cancer cell lines and tissues have revealed a strong correlation between the levels of EZH2 and SUZ12 and the invasiveness of these cancers Bracken et al. 2003 22 5323 5335 Kirmizis et al. 2003 2 113 121 Kleer et al. 2003 100 11606 11611 Varambally et al. 2002 419 624 9 indicating that dysfunction of the EED EZH2 complex may contribute to cancer.

Given that the EED EZH2 complex mediated histone H3 K27 methylation participates in a variety of important processes there is a need in the art for agents that modulate the activity of this complex and methods for identifying the same.

The present invention reveals the intrinsic histone methyltransferase HMTase activity of a reconstituted complex comprising EZH2 EED and SUZ12 with or without RbAp48 and or AEBP2 wherein the reconstituted complex facilitates homeotic box Hox gene silencing participates in X inactivation plays a role in germline development and or plays a role in stem cell pluripotency. The native complex has also been associated with cancer. Accordingly the methods of the invention can be practiced to identify compounds to treat cancer and or compounds that modulate Hox gene silencing X inactivation genomic imprinting stem cell pluripotency and or germline development.

The mechanism by which histone methylation participates in transcriptional regulation is best illustrated by the HMTase SUV39H1 and its functional partner HP1. A model is suggested wherein SUV39H1 and its homolog Clr4 methylate lysine 9 of histone H3 thereby creating a binding site for subsequent recruitment of HP1 through its chromo domain Bannister et al. 2001 410 120 124 Lachner et al. 2001 410 116 120 Lachner et al. 2001 410 116 120 Nakayama et al. 2001 292 110 113 Rea et al. 2000 406 593 599 . Similarly the inventors have proposed that histone H3 K27 methylation by the ESC E Z EED EZH2 complexes helps recruit the PRC1 complex through specific recognition of the methylated lysine 27 of histone H3 by the chromo domain of the Polycomb Pc protein Cao and Zhang 2004 14 155 164 a core component of the PRC1 complex Francis et al. 2001 8 545 556 . Four lines of evidence are consistent with this suggestion. First in vitro studies demonstrated that the Pc chromo domain has higher affinity toward lysine 27 methylated histone peptide when compared with its non methylated counterpart Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Czermin et al. 2002 111 185 196 Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 29 . Second chromatin immunoprecipitation ChIP coupled with RNAi experiments have demonstrated that loss of ESC E Z binding on the Polycomb responsive element PRE of the Ubx gene correlates with loss of histone H3 K27 methylation and concomitant loss of Pc binding Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 . Third structural studies have revealed that the amino acids of histone H3 preceding lysine 27 contribute to the specific recognition of the methylated lysine 27 by Pc chromo domain Fischle et al. 2003 17 1870 1881 Min et al. 2003 17 1823 1828 . Further amino acid substitutions that abolish E Z HMTase activity also eliminate its ability to contribute to PcG silencing of the Ubx gene in wing imaginal discs Muller et al. 2002 111 197 20 . Collectively these data indicate that the HMTase activity of E Z plays an important role in recruiting the PRC1 complex as well as in Hox gene silencing.

Embodiments of the present invention provide a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 wherein the reconstituted complex has histone methyltransferase HMTase activity for lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 . In representative embodiments the reconstituted complex further comprises RbAp48 AEBP2 or both. In still other embodiments the reconstituted complex consists essentially of EED EZH2 and SUZ12 wherein the reconstituted complex has histone methyltransferase HMTase activity for lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 .

The present invention further provides methods of producing a reconstituted complex comprising providing a host cell comprising a a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EED protein b a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EZH2 protein and c a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an SUZ12 protein and culturing the host cell under conditions sufficient for expression of the proteins and production of the reconstituted complex.

In other embodiments the present invention provides a host cell comprising a a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EED protein b a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EZH2 protein and c a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an SUZ12 protein. In representative embodiments the host cell is an insect cell. In still other embodiments the insect cell is an Sf9 cell.

The present invention further provides methods of identifying a compound that modulates the histone methyltransferase HMTase activity for lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 of a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 the method comprising contacting the reconstituted complex with a histone substrate in the presence of a test compound and detecting the level of H3 K27 methylation under conditions sufficient to provide H3 K27 methylation wherein a change in H3 K27 methylation as compared with the level of H3 K27 methylation in the absence of the test compound indicates that the test compound is a modulator of the H3 K27 HTMase activity of the reconstituted complex. In some embodiments the identified compound is an inhibitor of HTMase activity. In other embodiments the identified compound is an activator of HTMase activity.

In still other embodiments the present invention provides methods of identifying a candidate compound for treating cancer comprising contacting a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 with a histone substrate in the presence of a test compound and detecting the level of histone methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 under conditions sufficient to provide H3 K27 methylation wherein a reduction in H3 K27 methylation as compared with the level of H3 K27 methylation in the absence of the test compound indicates that the test compound is a candidate compound for the treatment of cancer.

The present invention further provides methods of inhibiting methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 comprising contacting a cell with an inhibitor of the H3 K27 histone methyltransferase HMTase activity of a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12. In representative embodiments the cell is a cultured cell. In other representative embodiments the cell is a cell in vivo in a subject.

Embodiments of the present invention further provide reagents for increasing sensitivity of detection of methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 comprising a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 optionally in a suspension medium.

The present invention further provides methods of identifying a compound that derepresses Hox gene e.g. HoxA9 expression comprising contacting a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 with a histone substrate in the presence of a test compound and detecting the level of histone methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 under conditions sufficient to provide H3 K27 methylation wherein a reduction in H3 K27 methylation as compared with the level of H3 K27 methylation in the absence of the test compound indicates that the test compound is a candidate compound for Hox gene derepression.

These and other aspects of the invention are set forth in more detail in the detailed description below.

The present invention will now be described in more detail with reference to the accompanying drawings in which embodiments of the invention are shown. This invention may however be embodied in different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein. Rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art.

Unless otherwise defined all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. The terminology used in the description of the invention herein is for the purpose of describing particular embodiments only and is not intended to be limiting of the invention. All publications patent applications patents and other references mentioned herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety.

As used in the description of the invention and the appended claims the singular forms a an and the are intended to include the plural forms as well unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Also as used herein and or refers to and encompasses any and all possible combinations of one or more of the associated listed items as well as the lack of combinations when interpreted in the alternative or . The term about as used herein when referring to a measurable value such as an amount of protein dose time temperature enzymatic activity or other biological activity and the like is meant to encompass variations of 20 10 5 1 0.5 or even 0.1 of the specified amount.

Except as otherwise indicated standard methods known to those skilled in the art may be used for cloning genes amplifying and detecting nucleic acids and the like. Such techniques are known to those skilled in the art. See e.g. Sambrook et al. Molecular Cloning A Laboratory Manual 2nd Ed. Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1989 F. M. Ausubel et al. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology Green Publishing Associates Inc. and John Wiley Sons Inc. New York .

Chromatin structure plays a role in gene regulation and epigenetic inheritance. Post translational modifications of histones are involved in the establishment and maintenance of higher order chromatin structure. Further it has been reported that the tails of certain core histones can be modified by acetylation methylation phosphorylation ribosylation and ubiquitination. The present invention is based in part on the reconstitution of a protein complex that exhibits methyltransferase HMTase activity.

According to some embodiments the present invention provides a reconstituted complex comprising consisting essentially of or consisting of EED EZH2 and SUZ12 wherein the reconstituted complex has histone methyltransferase HMTase activity for lysine residues of histone H3. In particular embodiments the reconstituted complex has HMTase activity for lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 . In some embodiments the reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 further comprises RbAp48 AEBP2 or both. Accordingly the reconstituted complex can comprise EED EZH2 and SUZ12 with or without RbAp48 and or AEBP2. In particular embodiments the complex does not comprise RbAp48.

In representative embodiments the reconstituted complex has HMTase activity that is specific for H3 K27 meaning that substantially all of the observed HMTase activity is directed to H3 K27 e.g. at least about 75 80 85 90 95 98 or more . In some embodiments of the invention there is no or essentially no detectable methylation at sites other than H3 K27. In still other embodiments some methylation e.g. less than 5 or 10 is detected at other sites e.g. H3 K9.

As used herein reconstituted refers to a recombinant complex that is formulated from individual isolated components. As used herein recombinant refers to a product formed by using recombinant technology i.e. created utilizing genetic engineering techniques which are well known in the art.

As used herein isolated refers to a component that is separated or substantially free from at least some of the other components or associated elements of the naturally occurring complex to which the component is associated.

The terms EED EZH2 SUZ12 RbAp48 and or AEBP2 as described herein encompass homologs from various organisms. In particular embodiments EED EZH2 SUZ12 RbAp48 and or AEBP2 can be mammalian e.g. human simian rat mouse feline canine bovine equine ovine caprine lagomorph etc. proteins proteins e.g. ESC E Z Su z 12 and p55 nematode proteins e.g. MES 2 MES 3 and MES 4 plant proteins or combinations thereof. A combination thereof of the proteins described above indicates that at least one protein can be derived from one organism and at least one protein can be derived from a different organism. For example EED can be a mammalian protein and EZH2 can be a plant protein.

It will be further understood that the terms EED EZH2 SUZ12 RbAp48 and or AEBP2 can encompass a functional or biologically active variant isoform derivative fragment or the like thereof as understood by those skilled in the art. As used herein variant refers to an amino acid sequence that is altered by one or more amino acids. The variant may have conservative changes wherein a substituted amino acid has similar structural or chemical properties. In particular such changes can be guided by known similarities between amino acids in physical features such as charge density hydrophobicity hydrophilicity size and configuration so that amino acids are substituted with other amino acids having essentially the same functional properties. For example Ala may be replaced with Val or Ser Val may be replaced with Ala Leu Met or Iie preferably Ala or Leu Leu may be replaced with Ala Val or Ile preferably Val or Ile Gly may be replaced with Pro or Cys preferably Pro Pro may be replaced with Gly Cys Ser or Met preferably Gly Cys or Ser Cys may be replaced with Gly Pro Ser or Met preferably Pro or Met Met may be replaced with Pro or Cys preferably Cys His may be replaced with Phe or Gln preferably Phe Phe may be replaced with His Tyr or Trp preferably His or Tyr Tyr may be replaced with His Phe or Trp preferably Phe or Trp Trp may be replaced with Phe or Tyr preferably Tyr Asn may be replaced with Gln or Ser preferably Gln Gln may be replaced with His Lys Glu Asn or Ser preferably Asn or Ser Ser may be replaced with Gln Thr Pro Cys or Ala Thr may be replaced with Gln or Ser preferably Ser Lys may be replaced with Gln or Arg Arg may be replaced with Lys Asp or Glu preferably Lys or Asp Asp may be replaced with Lys Arg or Glu preferably Arg or Glu and Glu may be replaced with Arg or Asp preferably Asp. Once made changes can be routinely screened to determine their effects on function.

Alternatively a variant may have nonconservative changes e.g. replacement of glycine with tryptophan . Analogous minor variations may also include amino acid deletions or insertions or both. Guidance in determining which amino acid residues may be substituted inserted or deleted without abolishing biological activity may be found using computer programs well known in the art for example LASERGENE software. In particular embodiments a functional variant retains at least one biological activity normally associated with the component of interest e.g. H3 K27 HMTase activity . In particular embodiments the functional variant retains at least about 40 50 60 75 85 90 95 or more biological activity normally associated with the natural component e.g. K27 specific HMTase activity .

As used herein derivative refers a component that has been subjected to a chemical modification. Derivatization of a protein component can involve the replacement of a hydrogen by an acetyl acyl alkyl amino formyl or morpholino group. Derivative molecules can retain the biological activities of the naturally occurring molecules but can confer advantages such as longer lifespan or enhanced activity.

In particular embodiments a biologically active variant or derivative of any of the protein components of the reconstituted complex has at least about 60 70 75 80 85 90 95 98 or more amino acid sequence similarity or identity with the amino acid sequence of a naturally occurring protein.

As used herein fragment refers to a portion of the component that retains at least one biological activity normally associated with that component e.g. H3 K27 HMTase activity and can have at least about 50 70 80 90 or more of the biological activity as compared with the full length protein or even has a greater level of biological activity. For example in particular embodiments a fragment of EZH2 comprises the catalytic domain the SAM binding site and or the SET domain. Generally the fragment retains the ability to participate in complex formation. In representative embodiments the fragment comprises at least about 50 100 150 200 250 or 500 consecutive amino acids of the full length protein.

Isoforms of the components of the reconstituted complex are well known in the art. For example Kuzmichev et al. 14 2 183 93 2004 and Pasini et al. 3 22 26 2004 describe EED isoforms. See also e.g. GenBank Accession Nos. NM004456 and NP004447 EZH2 human isoform a GenBank Accession Nos. NM152998 and NP694543 EZH2 human isoform b GenBank Accession Nos. NM003797 and NP003788 EED human isoform a GenBank Accession Nos. NM152991 and NP694536 EED human isoform b GenBank Accession Nos. NM143802 and NP652059 SU Z 12 isoform a from and GenBank Accession Nos. NM168826 and NP730465 SU Z 12 isoform b from .

In further embodiments the reconstituted complex of the present invention has enzyme activity comparable to the enzyme activity of a native complex e.g. at least 70 80 90 95 or more . In other embodiments the reconstituted complex has substrate specificity comparable to the substrate specificity of a native complex e.g. preference for H3 in nucleosome form and further a preference for H3 in dinucleosome or oligonucleosome as compared with mononucleosome form . In particular embodiments the histone substrate is a core histone or histone complex i.e. free or essentially free of DNA . In some embodiments the histone substrate is present in a nucleosome i.e. the reconstituted complex is contacted with a nucleosome comprising the histone substrate . More particularly the histone substrate can be a core histone a histone octamer or a nucleosome including but not limited to a mononucleosome a dinucleosome or an oligonucleosome. In particular embodiments the histone substrate is a dinucleosome.

The present invention further provides a method of producing the reconstituted complex of the present invention the method comprising consisting essentially of or consisting of providing a host cell comprising heterologous nucleic acid sequences encoding proteins of the reconstituted complex and culturing the host cell under conditions sufficient for expression of the proteins and production of the reconstituted complex. In particular embodiments in the method of producing the reconstituted complex the host cell comprises a a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EED protein b a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EZH2 protein and c a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding a SUZ12 protein and culturing the host cell under conditions sufficient for expression of the proteins and production of the reconstituted complex. In some embodiments the host cell further comprises d a nucleic acid sequence encoding an RbAp48 protein e a nucleic acid sequence encoding an AEBP2 protein or D both.

As used herein nucleic acid encompasses both RNA and DNA including cDNA genomic DNA synthetic e.g. chemically synthesized DNA and chimeras of RNA and DNA. The nucleic acid may be double stranded or single stranded. Where single stranded the nucleic acid may be a sense strand or an antisense strand. The nucleic acid may be synthesized using oligonucleotide analogs or derivatives e.g. inosine or phosphorothioate nucleotides . Such oligonucleotides can be used for example to prepare nucleic acids that have altered base pairing abilities or increased resistance to nucleases.

The term heterologous nucleic acid is a well known term of art and would be readily understood by one of skill in the art to be a nucleic acid that is not normally present within the host cell into which it has been introduced and or is a nucleic acid that is expressed under the control of regulatory elements that are not normally present within the host cell. A heterologous nucleic acid of this invention can also be a nucleic acid that is present in an amount or expressed in an amount that is not normally the amount present in the cell into which the nucleic acid has been introduced. The heterologous nucleic acid will typically be a sequence that is not naturally occurring in the host cell. Additionally the heterologous nucleic acids encoding the components of the reconstituted complex can be associated with appropriate expression control sequences e.g. transcription translation control signals and polyadenylation signals.

It will be appreciated that a variety of promoter enhancer elements can be used depending on the level and tissue specific expression desired. The promoter can be constitutive or inducible e.g. the metalothionein promoter or a hormone inducible promoter depending on the pattern of expression desired. The promoter can be native or foreign and can be a natural or a synthetic sequence. By foreign it is intended that the promoter is not found in the wild type host into which the promoter is introduced. The promoter is chosen so that it will function in the target cell s of interest. Moreover specific initiation signals are generally required for efficient translation of inserted protein coding sequences. These translational control sequences which can include the ATG initiation codon and adjacent sequences can be of a variety of origins both natural and synthetic. In embodiments of the invention wherein the heterologous nucleic acids encoding the components of the reconstituted complex comprise an additional sequence to be transcribed the transcriptional units can be operatively associated with separate promoters or with a single upstream promoter and one or more downstream internal ribosome entry site IRES sequences e.g. the picornavirus EMC IRES sequence .

Suitable host cells are well known in the art. See e.g. Goeddel Methods in Enzymology 185 Academic Press San Diego Calif. 1990 . For example the host cell can be a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell. Further it is well known that polypeptides and or proteins can be expressed in bacterial cells such as insect cells e.g. the baculovirus expression system yeast cells plant cells or mammalian cells e.g. human rat mouse bovine porcine ovine caprine equine feline canine lagomorph simian and the like . The host cell can be a cultured cell such as a cell of a primary or immortalized cell line. The host cell can be a cell in a microorganism animal or plant being used essentially as a bioreactor. In particular embodiments of the present invention the host cell is any insect cell that allows for replication of well known expression vectors. For example the host cell can be from such as the Sf9 or Sf21 cell lines cell lines or mosquito cell lines e.g. derived cell lines. Use of insect cells for expression of heterologous proteins is well documented as are methods of introducing nucleic acids such as vectors e.g. insect cell compatible vectors into such cells and methods of maintaining such cells in culture. See for example Methods in Molecular Biology ed. Richard Humana Press NJ 1995 O Reilly et al. Baculovirus Expression Vectors A Laboratory Manual Oxford Univ. Press 1994 Samulski et al. J. Vir. 63 3822 8 1989 Kajigaya et al. Proc. Nat l. Acad. Sci. USA 88 4646 50 1991 Ruffing et al. J. Vir. 66 6922 30 1992 Kimbauer et al. Vir. 219 37 44 1996 Zhao et al. Vir. 272 382 93 2000 and Samulski et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 204 059. In particular embodiments of the present invention the insect cell is an Sf9 cell.

In some embodiments the method of producing the reconstituted complex further comprises isolating the expressed reconstituted complex from the cultured host cell or a culture medium from the cultured host cell. The isolated reconstituted complex can be isolated and purified according to well known protein isolation and purification techniques that can involve a combination of procedures and iterations of the same in an effort to obtain the desired amount of protein and level of purity.

Accordingly in some embodiments the method of producing the reconstituted complex comprises binding the expressed reconstituted complex to a solid support. The solid support can be an inorganic and or organic particulate support material comprising sand silicas silicates silica gel glass glass beads glass fibers alumina zirconia titania nickel and suitable polymer materials including but are not limited to agarose polystyrene polyethylene polyethylene glycol polyethylene glycol grafted or covalently bonded to polystyrene also termed PEG polystyrene in any suitable form known to those of skill in the art such as a particle bead gel or plate. The solid support can comprise a moiety as known to those skilled in the art that can be used to bind to the expressed reconstituted complex e.g. nickel an antibody or an enzyme substrate e.g. glutathione directed to the expressed reconstituted complex. Detection can be facilitated by coupling or tagging i.e. physically linking the desired protein or antibody directed to the protein to an appropriate detectable substance including commercially available detectable substances. Examples of detectable substances include but are not limited to various antibodies enzymes peptide and or protein tags prosthetic groups fluorescent materials luminescent materials bioluminescent materials and radioactive materials. Examples of suitable antibodies for example antibodies against EZH2 and SUZ12 have been described in Cao et al. 298 1039 1043 2002 Peters et al. 12 1577 1589 2003 and Plath et al. 300 131 135 2003 . Examples of suitable enzymes include but are not limited to glutathione S transferase GST horseradish peroxidase alkaline phosphatase galactosidase or acetylcholinesterase. Examples of peptide and or protein tags include but are not limited to a polyhistidine peptide tag the FLAG peptide tag maltose binding protein MBP thioredoxin Trx and calmodulin binding peptide. Examples of suitable prosthetic group complexes include but are not limited to streptavidin biotin and avidin biotin. Examples of suitable fluorescent materials include but are not limited to umbelliferone fluorescein fluorescein isothiocyanate rhodamine dichlorotriazinylamine fluorescein dansyl chloride or phycoerythrin. An example of a luminescent material includes luminal. Examples of bioluminescent materials include but are not limited to luciferase luciferin and aequorin. Examples of suitable radioactive material include but are not limited to I I I and H. In particular embodiments the expressed reconstituted complex comprises a purification tag e.g. any one or more of the components can be tagged . In some embodiments the reconstituted complex of the present invention has a purity level of at least about 40 50 60 70 80 90 95 97 98 99 or more w w .

In further embodiments of the present invention the host cell can be stably transformed with the heterologous nucleic acid sequences encoding the proteins described above. Stable transformation as used herein generally refers to the integration of the heterologous nucleic acid sequences into the genome of the host cell in contrast to transient transformation wherein the heterologous nucleic acid sequences introduced into the host cell do not integrate into the genome of the host cell. The term stable transformant can further refer to stable expression of an episome e.g. Epstein Barr Virus EBV .

In particular embodiments the host cell is stably transformed with the heterologous nucleic acid sequences encoding an EED protein an EZH2 protein and a SUZ12 protein and optionally an RbAp48 protein an AEBP2 protein or both.

In some embodiments the host cell comprises one or more recombinant vectors comprising the heterologous nucleic acid sequences encoding the proteins described above in particular an EED protein an EZH2 protein and a SUZ12 protein. As used herein recombinant vector refers to a viral or non viral vector that comprises one or more heterologous nucleotide sequences i.e. transgenes e.g. two three four five or more heterologous nucleotide sequences. In particular embodiments the one or more vectors comprise i a vector comprising a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EED protein ii a separate vector comprising a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EZH2 protein and iii a further separate vector comprising a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding a SUZ12 protein. In other embodiments methods of producing the reconstituted complex further comprise transforming the host cell with the one or more vectors. The components of the reconstituted complex can each be expressed from a separate vector. Alternatively a single vector can encode one or more of the components of the reconstituted complex.

Suitable vectors include virus vectors e.g. baculovirus retrovirus alphavirus vaccinia virus adenovirus adeno associated virus or herpes simplex virus lipid vectors poly lysine vectors synthetic polyamino polymer vectors that are used with nucleic acid molecules such as plasmids and the like. Delivery vectors are described in more detail in Section IV.

In further embodiments the present invention provides a host cell comprising consisting essentially of or consisting of heterologous nucleic acid sequences encoding each of the proteins of the reconstituted complex. In particular embodiments the host cell comprises consists essentially of or consists of a a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EED protein b a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EZH2 protein and c a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding a SUZ12 protein and optionally a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding d an RbAp48 protein e a nucleic acid sequence encoding an AEBP2 protein or f both. Suitable host cells are described above. In some embodiments the host cell is an insect cell. In particular embodiments the insect cell is an Sf9 cell.

Further the host cell can be stably transformed with the heterologous nucleic acid sequences encoding proteins of the reconstituted complex e.g. a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EED protein a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EZH2 protein a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding a SUZ12 protein and optionally a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an RbAp48 protein a nucleic acid sequence encoding an AEBP2 protein or both. In some embodiments the host cell comprises one or more recombinant vectors comprising the heterologous nucleic acid sequences as described above. In further embodiments the one or more vectors comprise a vector comprising a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding i an EED protein ii a separate vector comprising a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding an EZH2 protein and iii a further separate vector comprising a heterologous nucleic acid sequence encoding a SUZ12 protein. Suitable vectors are described herein. According to embodiments of the present invention the vector can be a baculovirus vector.

Nucleic acid and amino acid sequences of EZH2 EED SUZ12 AEBP2 and RbAp48 are known in the art see e.g. Chen et al. 1996 15 38 1 30 7 EZH2 Schumacher et al. 1998 15 54 1 79 88 EED Kuzmichev et al. 2004 14 2 183 93 EED Pasini et al. 2004 3 22 26 EED Birve et al. 2001 128 3371 3379 SUZ12 Qian et al. 1993 264 648 652 RbAp48 Cao et al. 2004 15 57 67 and Zhang et al. 1999 13 1924 1935 baculovirus expressing mammalian RbAp48 He et al. 1999 21 274 21 14678 84 AEBP2 GenBank Accession Nos. NM004456 and NP004447 EZH2 human isoform a GenBank Accession Nos. NM152998 and NP694543 EZH2 human isoform b GenBank Accession Nos. NM079297 and NP524021 E Z GenBank Accession Nos. NM003797 and NP003788 EED human isoform a GenBank Accession Nos. NM152991 and NP694536 EED human isoform b GenBank Accession Nos. NM058083 and NP477431 ESC GenBank Accession Nos. NM015355 and NP056170 SUZ12 human GenBank Accession Nos. NM143802 and NP652059 SU Z 12 isoform a from GenBank Accession Nos. NM168826 and NP730465 SU Z 12 isoform b from GenBank Accession Nos. NM005610 and NP005601 RbAp48 human and GenBank Accession Nos. NM153207 and NP694939 AEBP2 human .

The present invention further provides methods of identifying compounds that modulate the histone methyl transferase HMTase activity of the reconstituted complex described herein or modulate binding of the reconstituted complex to histone H3 and or nucleosomes. As used herein modulate modulates or modulation refers to enhancement e.g. an increase or inhibition e.g. a reduction in the specified activity. The term enhancement enhance enhances or enhancing refers to an increase in the specified parameter e.g. at least about a 1.1 fold 1.25 fold 1.5 fold 2 fold 3 fold 4 fold 5 fold 6 fold 8 fold 10 fold twelve fold or even fifteen fold or more increase . The term inhibit or reduce or grammatical variations thereof as used herein refers to a decrease or diminishment in the specified activity of at least about 10 25 35 40 50 60 75 80 90 95 or more. In particular embodiments the inhibition or reduction results in little or essentially no detectible activity at most an insignificant amount e.g. less than about 10 or even 5 .

In some embodiments the present invention provides methods of identifying a compound that modulates the HMTase activity for lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 of a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 the method comprising consisting essentially of or consists of contacting the reconstituted complex with a histone substrate in the presence of a test compound and detecting the level of H3 K27 methylation under conditions sufficient to provide H3 K27 methylation wherein a change in H3 K27 methylation as compared with the level of H3 K27 methylation in the absence of the test compound indicates that the test compound is a modulator of the H3 K27 HTMase activity of the reconstituted complex. In some embodiments the reconstituted complex further comprises RbAp48 AEBP2 or both wherein RbAp48 and or AEBP2 are mammalian proteins proteins nematode proteins plant proteins or combinations thereof. In particular embodiments a reduction in H3 K27 methylation as compared with the level of H3 K27 methylation in the absence of the test compound indicates that the test compound is an inhibitor of the H3 K27 HMTase activity of the reconstituted complex. Inhibitor as used herein refers to the ability of the test compound to reduce the specified activity as compared to the level of activity in the absence of the test compound. In some embodiments the test compound decreases or diminishes HTMase activity by at least about 10 25 35 40 50 60 75 80 90 95 or more as compared to the level of HTMase activity in the absence of the test compound. In particular embodiments there is little or essentially no detectible activity at most an insignificant amount e.g. less than about 10 or even 5 . In other embodiments an increase in H3 K27 methylation as compared with the level of H3 K27 methylation in the absence of the test compound indicates that the test compound is an activator of the H3 K27 HMTase activity of the reconstituted complex. Activator as used herein refers to the ability of the test compound to increase or prevent a reduction of the specified activity as compared to the level of activity in the absence of the test compound. In some embodiments there is at least about a 1.1 fold 1.25 fold 1.5 fold 2 fold 3 fold 4 fold 5 fold 6 fold 8 fold 10 fold twelve fold or even fifteen fold or more increase in HTMase activity.

Modulation of the HMTase activity of the reconstituted complex can be determined by any method known in the art for example by the addition of e.g. a radiolabeled methyl donor such as S adenosyl L methionine SAM into the reaction mixture or by monitoring histone H3 lysine 27 methylation by ELISA using a labeled antibody e.g. a fluorescently labeled antibody which specifically recognizes the methylated form of histone H3 lysine 27 as described in Wang et al. 293 853 857 2001 . Inhibitors or activators identified in the first round of screening can be analyzed individually in an assay to determine the ICand specificity using HMTase assays as disclosed herein. Compounds having a lower ICand exhibiting specificity for the EED EZH2 enzyme can be further analyzed in tissue culture to determine their in vivo effects on H3 K27 methylation cell growth e.g. by trypsinization and trypan blue staining and or toxicity.

Test compounds which can be screened in accordance with the methods provided herein encompass numerous chemical classes including but not limited to synthetic or semi synthetic chemicals purified natural products proteins antibodies peptides peptide aptamers nucleic acids oligonucleotides carbohydrates lipids or other small or large organic or inorganic molecules. Small molecules are desirable because such molecules are more readily absorbed after oral administration and have fewer potential antigenic determinants. Non peptide agents or small molecule libraries are generally prepared by a synthetic approach but recent advances in biosynthetic methods using enzymes may enable one to prepare chemical libraries that are otherwise difficult to synthesize chemically. Small molecule libraries can also be obtained from various commercial entities for example SPECS and BioSPEC B.V. Rijswijk the Netherlands Chembridge Corporation San Diego Calif. Comgenex USA Inc. Princeton N.J. Maybridge Chemical Ltd. Cornwall UK and Asinex Moscow Russia .

In certain embodiments the methods of identifying a compound that modulates the HTMase activity of the reconstituted complex described are cell based methods or cell free methods. In other embodiments the methods provide high throughput screening capabilities to identify modulators of the reconstituted complex. For example a cell based high throughput screening assay for use in accordance with the methods disclosed herein includes that disclosed by Stockwell et al. 1999 6 71 83 wherein biosynthetic processes such as DNA synthesis and post translational processes are monitored in a miniaturized cell based assay. To illustrate a cell based assay to identify inhibitors of endogenous HMTase activity can encompass the use of a reporter gene such as luciferase operably linked to an upstream region of a target gene such as a Hox gene known to be targeted by HMTase. Cells expressing the reporter construct can be exposed to the test compound and reporter gene expression can be monitored. To confirm that the inhibitor is specifically targeting the reconstituted complex a secondary in vitro screen can be employed using reconstituted complex. Alternatively components of the reconstituted complex can be expressed in a cell that lacks an endogenous complex and used to directly screen for modulators.

High throughput cell free methods for screening small molecule libraries for candidate protein binding molecules are well known in the art and can be employed to identify molecules that bind to at least one component of the reconstituted complex and modulate the HMTase activity or binding to histone. For example nucleosomal histone substrates e.g. dinucleosomal histones purified from HeLa cells can be coated on a multi well plate or other suitable surface and a reaction mix containing the reconstituted enzyme complex added to the substrate. Prior to concurrent with or subsequent to the addition of the reconstituted complex a test compound can be added to the well or surface containing the substrate. The reaction mixture can be washed with a solution that substantially reflects physiological conditions to remove unbound or weakly bound test compounds. Alternatively the test compound can be immobilized and a solution of reconstituted complex can be contacted with the column filter or other surface. The ability of a test compound to modulate binding of a reconstituted complex to histone can be determined by labeling e.g. radio labeling or chemiluminescence or competitive ELISA assays.

Library screening can be performed in any format that allows rapid preparation and processing of multiple reactions. Stock solutions of the test agents as well as assay components are prepared manually and all subsequent pipetting diluting mixing washing incubating sample readout and data collecting is done using commercially available robotic pipetting equipment automated work stations and analytical instruments for detecting the signal generated by the assay i.e. methylation of histone H3 lysine 27.

A variety of other reagents can be included in the screening assay of the instant invention. These include reagents like salts neutral proteins e.g. albumin detergents etc. which can be used to facilitate optimal protein protein binding and or HMTase activity and or reduce non specific or background interactions. Also reagents that otherwise improve the efficiency of the assay such as protease inhibitors nuclease inhibitors anti microbial agents and the like may be used. The mixture of components can be added in any order that provides for the requisite binding and or HMTase activity.

The present invention also provides methods of identifying a candidate compound for treating hyperproliferative disorders such as tumors cancers and neoplastic disorders as well as premalignant and non neoplastic or non malignant hyperproliferative disorders comprising consisting essentially of or consisting of contacting a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 with a histone substrate in the presence of a test compound and detecting the level of histone methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 under conditions sufficient to provide H3 K27 methylation wherein a reduction in H3 K27 methylation as compared with the level of H3 K27 methylation in the absence of the test compound indicates that the test compound is a candidate compound for the treatment of hyperproliferative disorders such as tumors cancers and neoplastic disorders as well as premalignant and non neoplastic or non malignant hyperproliferative disorders.

In particular embodiments the present invention provides methods of identifying a candidate compound for treating cancer. Exemplary cancers include malignant disorders such as breast cancers osteosarcomas angiosarcomas fibrosarcomas and other sarcomas leukemias lymphomas sinus tumors ovarian uretal bladder prostate and other genitourinary cancers colon esophageal and stomach cancers and other gastrointestinal cancers lung cancers myelomas pancreatic cancers liver cancers kidney cancers endocrine cancers skin cancers and brain or central and peripheral nervous CNS system tumors malignant or benign including gliomas and neuroblastomas. By the terms treating cancer or treatment of cancer it is intended that the severity of the cancer is reduced or the cancer is at least partially eliminated.

In some embodiments compounds that serve as test compounds can be derived from a screen for SET domain containing proteins including but not limited to SET7 inhibitors. The SET domain is a conserved sequence motif that may be a signature motif present in protein methyltransferases where several of the proteins possessed methyltransferase activity including histone methylation. See Zhang et al. Transcription regulation by histone methylation interplay between different covalent modifications of the core histone tails. Genes Development 15 2343 2360 2001 .

In addition to the screening methods described above the reconstituted complex of the present invention can be used as a research reagent e.g. to identify compounds for modulating HTMase activity for studies of histone function. For example identification of compounds that increase H3 K27 HMTase activity can be used to study the function of modifications as regulators of H3 K27 HMTase activity.

According to other embodiments the present invention further provides methods of inhibiting histone methylation. In particular methods of inhibiting methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 comprising consisting essentially of or consisting of contacting a cell with an inhibitor of the H3 K27 histone methyltransferase HMTase activity of a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12. The reconstituted complex can further comprise RbAp48 AEBP2 or both. In some embodiments the cell is a cultured cell. In other embodiments the cell is a cell in vivo in a subject.

Subjects for which implementation of the present invention is appropriate include but are not limited to avians and mammals with mammals being preferred. The term avian as used herein includes but is not limited to chickens ducks geese quail turkeys and pheasants. In some embodiments human subjects are preferred. Human subjects include subjects of both genders and at any stage of development i.e. neonate infant juvenile adolescent adult . While some embodiments of the present invention are primarily concerned with implementation regarding human subjects the invention can also be carried out on animal subjects particularly mammalian subjects such as non human primates bovines ovines caprines equines felines canines lagomorphs rats mice etc. The present invention is carried out on animals for veterinary purposes and for drug screening and drug development purposes.

In further embodiments the present invention provides pharmaceutical preparations comprising an inhibitor of the reconstituted complex described above and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. The present invention further provides the use of the inhibitor of the reconstituted complex described above or the screening assays described herein for the preparation of a medicament.

Embodiments of the present invention further provide a reagent for increasing sensitivity of detection of histone methylation in particular methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 comprising consisting essentially of or consisting of a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12. The reagent can further comprise a suspension medium. The reconstituted complex can further comprise RbAp48 AEBP2 or both. In some embodiments the reagent is lyophilized. In particular embodiments the reagent is a diagnostic reagent for cancer.

In further embodiments the present invention provides a kit for determining inhibition of histone methylation the kit comprising consisting essentially of consisting of a a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 and b written instructions for methods for determining inhibition of histone methylation comprising determining the inhibition of the histone methyltransferase HTMase activity of the reconstituted complex and optionally additional reagents or apparatus for carrying out methods for determining inhibition of HTMase activity. The reconstituted complex can further comprise RbAp48 AEBP2 or both. In particular embodiments the method is directed to determining inhibition of histone methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 H3 K27 the kit comprising consisting essentially of consisting of a a reconstituted complex comprising EED EZH2 and SUZ12 and b written instructions for methods for determining inhibition of H3 K27 methylation comprising determining the inhibition of H3 K27 methyltransferase HTMase activity of the reconstituted complex and optionally additional reagents or apparatus for carrying out methods for determining inhibition of HTMase activity. In some embodiments the reconstituted complex can further comprise RbAp48 AEBP2 or both.

Any viral vector that is known in the art can be used in the present invention. Examples of such viral vectors include but are not limited to vectors derived from Adenoviridae Baculoviridae Birnaviridae Bunyaviridae Caliciviridae Capillovirus group Carlavirus group Carmovirus virus group Group Caulimovirus Closterovirus Group Commelina yellow mottle virus group Comovirus virus group Coronaviridae PM2 phage group Corcicoviridae Group Cryptic virus group Cryptovirus Cucumovirus virus group Family PHgr 6 phage group Cysioviridae Group Carnation ringspot Dianthovirus virus group Group Broad bean wilt Fabavirus virus group Filoviridae Flaviviridae Furovirus group Group Germinivirus Group Giardiavirus Hepadnaviridae Herpesviridae Hordeivirus virus group Illarvirus virus group Inoviridae Iridoviridae Leviviridae Lipothrixviridae Luteovirus group Marafivirus virus group Maize chlorotic dwarf virus group Icroviridae Myoviridae Necrovirus group Nepovirus virus group Nodaviridae Orthomyxoviridae Papovaviridae Paramyxoviridae Parsnip yellow fleck virus group Partitiviridae Parvoviridae Pea enation mosaic virus group Phycodnaviridae Picornaviridae Plasmaviridae Prodoviridae Polydnaviridae Potexvirus group Potyvirus Poxyiridae Reoviridae Retroviridae Rhabdoviridae Group Rhizidiovirus Siphoviridae Sobemovirus group SSV 1 Type Phages Tectiviridae Tenuivirus Tetraviridae Group Tobamovirus Group Tobravirus Togaviridae Group Tombusvirus Group Torovirus Totiviridae Group Tymovirus and plant virus satellites.

Protocols for producing recombinant viral vectors and for using viral vectors for nucleic acid delivery can be found in Ausubel F. M. et al. eds. Greene Publishing Associates 1989 and other standard laboratory manuals e.g. Vectors for Gene Therapy. In . John Wiley and Sons Inc. 1997 .

The term baculovirus as used herein is intended to encompass all baculoviruses. Baculoviruses are divided into three subfamilies including non occluded baculoviruses NOVs granulosis viruses GVs and nuclear polyhedrosis viruses NPVs . Although certain GVs and NOVs have been carefully studied NPVs are the most thoroughly characterized of the baculovirus subfamilies. Examples of NPVs include NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV NPV and NPV.

Standard procedures for engineering baculoviruses having various foreign genetic elements are well known in the art. Procedures for introducing recombinant baculoviruses into insects or cells thereof are also well known. See e.g. Pfeifer et al. 1997 Gene 188 183 190 and Clem et al. 1994 J Virol 68 6759 6762. Baculoviruses expressing mammalian RbAp48 are described in Cao et al. 15 57 67 2004 and Zhang et al. 13 1924 1935 1999 .

The term adenovirus as used herein is intended to encompass all adenoviruses including the and genera. To date at least forty seven human serotypes of adenoviruses have been identified see e.g. FIELDS et al. VIROLOGY volume 2 chapter 67 3d ed. Lippincott Raven Publishers . Preferably the adenovirus is a serogroup C adenovirus still more preferably the adenovirus is serotype 2 Ad2 or serotype 5 Ad5 .

The various regions of the adenovirus genome have been mapped and are understood by those skilled in the art see e.g. FIELDS et al. VIROLOGY volume 2 chapters 67 and 68 3d ed. Lippincott Raven Publishers . The genomic sequences of the various Ad serotypes as well as the nucleotide sequence of the particular coding regions of the Ad genome are known in the art and can be accessed e.g. from GenBank and NCBI see e.g. GenBank Accession Nos. J0917 M73260 X73487 AF108105 L19443 NC 003266 and NCBI Accession Nos. NC 001405 NC 001460 NC 002067 NC 00454 .

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that the inventive adenovirus vectors can be modified or targeted as described in Douglas et al. 1996 14 1574 U.S. Pat. No. 5 922 315 to Roy et al. U.S. Pat. No. 5 770 442 to Wickham et al. and or U.S. Pat. No. 5 712 136 to Wickham et al.

An adenovirus vector genome or rAd vector genome will typically comprise the Ad terminal repeat sequences and packaging signal. An adenovirus particle or recombinant adenovirus particle comprises an adenovirus vector genome or recombinant adenovirus vector genome respectively packaged within an adenovirus capsid. Generally the adenovirus vector genome is most stable at sizes of about 28 kb to 38 kb approximately 75 to 105 of the native genome size . In the case of an adenovirus vector containing large deletions and a relatively small heterologous nucleic acid of interest stuffer DNA can be used to maintain the total size of the vector within the desired range by methods known in the art.

Normally adenoviruses bind to a cell surface receptor CAR of susceptible cells via the knob domain of the fiber protein on the virus surface. The fiber knob receptor is a 45 kDa cell surface protein which has potential sites for both glycosylation and phosphorylation. Bergelson et al. 1997 275 1320 1323 . A secondary method of entry for adenovirus is through integrins present on the cell surface. Arginine Glycine Aspartic Acid RGD sequences of the adenoviral penton base protein bind integrins on the cell surface.

The adenovirus genome can be manipulated such that it encodes and expresses a nucleic acid of interest but is inactivated in terms of its ability to replicate in a normal lytic viral life cycle. See for example Berkner et al. 1988 6 616 Rosenfeld et al. 1991 252 431 434 and Rosenfeld et al. 1992 68 143 155. Representative adenoviral vectors derived from the adenovirus strain Ad type 5 d1324 or other strains of adenovirus e.g. Ad2 Ad3 Ad7 etc. are known to those skilled in the art.

Recombinant adenoviruses can be advantageous in certain circumstances in that they are not capable of infecting nondividing cells and can be used to infect a wide variety of cell types including epithelial cells. Furthermore the virus particle is relatively stable and amenable to purification and concentration and can be modified so as to affect the spectrum of infectivity. Additionally introduced adenoviral DNA and foreign DNA contained therein is not integrated into the genome of a host cell but remains episomal thereby avoiding potential problems that can occur as a result of insertional mutagenesis in situations where introduced DNA becomes integrated into the host genome e.g. as occurs with retroviral DNA . Moreover the carrying capacity of the adenoviral genome for foreign DNA is large relative to other delivery vectors Haj Ahmand and Graham 1986 57 267 .

In particular embodiments the adenovirus genome contains a deletion therein so that at least one of the adenovirus genomic regions does not encode a functional protein. For example first generation adenovirus vectors are typically deleted for the E1 genes and packaged using a cell that expresses the E1 proteins e.g. 293 cells . The E3 region is also frequently deleted as well as there is no need for complementation of this deletion. In addition deletions in the E4 E2a protein IX and fiber protein regions have been described e.g. by Armentano et al 1997 71 2408 Gao et al. 1996 70 8934 Dedieu et al. 1997 71 4626 Wang et al. 1997 4 393 U.S. Pat. No. 5 882 877 to Gregory et al. the disclosures of which are incorporated herein in their entirety . Preferably the deletions are selected to avoid toxicity to the packaging cell. Wang et al. 1997 4 393 has described toxicity from constitutive co expression of the E4 and E1 genes by a packaging cell line. Toxicity can be avoided by regulating expression of the E1 and or E4 gene products by an inducible rather than a constitutive promoter. Combinations of deletions that avoid toxicity or other deleterious effects on the host cell can be routinely selected by those skilled in the art.

As further examples in particular embodiments the adenovirus is deleted in the polymerase pol preterminal protein pTP IVa2 and or 100K regions see e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 6 328 958 PCT publication WO 00 12740 and PCT publication WO 02 098466 Ding et al. 2002 5 436 Hodges et al. 75 5913 Ding et al. 2001 12 955 the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties for the teachings of how to make and use deleted adenovirus vectors for gene delivery .

The term deleted adenovirus as used herein refers to the omission of at least one nucleotide from the indicated region of the adenovirus genome. Deletions can be greater than about 1 2 3 5 10 20 50 100 200 or even 500 nucleotides. Deletions in the various regions of the adenovirus genome can be about at least 1 5 10 25 50 75 90 95 99 or more of the indicated region. Alternately the entire region of the adenovirus genome is deleted. Preferably the deletion will prevent or essentially prevent the expression of a functional protein from that region. In general larger deletions are preferred as these have the additional advantage that they will increase the carrying capacity of the deleted adenovirus for a heterologous nucleotide sequence of interest. The various regions of the adenovirus genome have been mapped and are understood by those skilled in the art see e.g. FIELDS et al. VIROLOGY volume 2 chapters 67 and 68 3d ed. Lippincott Raven Publishers .

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that typically with the exception of the E3 genes any deletions will need to be complemented in order to propagate replicate and package additional virus e.g. by transcomplementation with a packaging cell.

The present invention can also be practiced with gutted adenovirus vectors as that term is understood in the art see e.g. Lieber et al. 1996 70 8944 60 in which essentially all of the adenovirus genomic sequences are deleted.

Adeno associated viruses AAV have also been employed as nucleic acid delivery vectors. For a review see Muzyczka et al. . 1992 158 97 129 . AAV are parvoviruses and have small icosahedral virions 18 26 nanometers in diameter and contain a single stranded genomic DNA molecule 4 5 kilobases in size. The viruses contain either the sense or antisense strand of the DNA molecule and either strand is incorporated into the virion. Two open reading frames encode a series of Rep and Cap polypeptides. Rep polypeptides Rep50 Rep52 Rep68 and Rep78 are involved in replication rescue and integration of the AAV genome although significant activity can be observed in the absence of all four Rep polypeptides. The Cap proteins VP1 VP2 VP3 form the virion capsid. Flanking the rep and cap open reading frames at the 5 and 3 ends of the genome are 145 basepair inverted terminal repeats ITRs the first 125 basepairs of which are capable of forming Y or T shaped duplex structures. It has been shown that the ITRs represent the minimal cis sequences required for replication rescue packaging and integration of the AAV genome. Typically in recombinant AAV vectors rAAV the entire rep and cap coding regions are excised and replaced with a heterologous nucleic acid of interest.

AAV are among the few viruses that can integrate their DNA into non dividing cells and exhibit a high frequency of stable integration into human chromosome 19 see for example Flotte et al. 1992 7 349 356 Samulski et al. 1989 J. Virol. 63 3822 3828 and McLaughlin et al. 1989 62 1963 1973 . A variety of nucleic acids have been introduced into different cell types using AAV vectors see for example Hermonat et al. 1984 81 6466 6470 Tratschin et al. 1985 4 2072 2081 Wondisford et al. 1988 2 32 39 Tratschin et al. 1984 51 611 619 and Flotte et al. 1993 268 3781 3790 .

A rAAV vector genome will typically comprise the AAV terminal repeat sequences and packaging signal. An AAV particle or rAAV particle comprises an AAV vector genome or rAAV vector genome respectively packaged within an AAV capsid. The rAAV vector itself need not contain AAV genes encoding the capsid and Rep proteins. In particular embodiments of the invention the rep and or cap genes are deleted from the AAV genome. In a representative embodiment the rAAV vector retains only the terminal AAV sequences ITRs necessary for integration excision replication.

Sources for the AAV capsid genes can include serotypes AAV 1 AAV 2 AAV 3 including 3a and 3b AAV 4 AAV 5 AAV 6 AAV 7 AAV 8 as well as bovine AAV and avian AAV and any other virus classified by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses ICTV as an AAV see e.g. BERNARD N. FIELDS et al. VIROLOGY volume 2 chapter 69 4th ed. Lippincott Raven Publishers .

Because of packaging limitations the total size of the rAAV genome will preferably be less than about 5.2 5 4.8 4.6 4.5 or 4.2 kb in size.

Any suitable method known in the art can be used to produce AAV vectors expressing the nucleic acids encoding the components of the complex of this invention see e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 139 941 5 858 775 6 146 874 for illustrative methods . In one particular method AAV stocks can be produced by co transfection of a rep cap vector encoding AAV packaging functions and the template encoding the AAV vDNA into human cells infected with the helper adenovirus Samulski et al. 1989 J. Virology 63 3822 .

In other particular embodiments the adenovirus helper virus is a hybrid helper virus that encodes AAV Rep and or capsid proteins. Hybrid helper Ad AAV vectors expressing AAV rep and or cap genes and methods of producing AAV stocks using these reagents are known in the art see e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 5 589 377 and 5 871 982 6 251 677 and 6 387 368 . Preferably the hybrid Ad of the invention expresses the AAV capsid proteins i.e. VP1 VP2 and VP3 . Alternatively or additionally the hybrid adenovirus can express one or more of AAV Rep proteins i.e. Rep40 Rep52 Rep68 and or Rep78 . The AAV sequences can be operatively associated with a tissue specific or inducible promoter.

The AAV rep and or cap genes can alternatively be provided by a packaging cell that stably expresses the genes see e.g. Gao et al. 1998 9 2353 Inoue et al. 1998 72 7024 U.S. Pat. No. 5 837 484 WO 98 27207 U.S. Pat. No. 5 658 785 WO 96 17947 .

Another vector for use in the present invention comprises Herpes Simplex Virus HSV . Herpes simplex virions have an overall diameter of 150 to 200 nm and a genome consisting of one double stranded DNA molecule that is 120 to 200 kilobases in length. Glycoprotein D gD is a structural component of the HSV envelope that mediates virus entry into host cells. The initial interaction of HSV with cell surface heparin sulfate proteoglycans is mediated by another glycoprotein glycoprotein C gC and or glycoprotein B gB . This is followed by interaction with one or more of the viral glycoproteins with cellular receptors. It has been shown that glycoprotein D of HSV binds directly to Herpes virus entry mediator HVEM of host cells. HVEM is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily Whitbeck et al. 1997 71 6083 6093 . Finally gD gB and the complex of gH and gL act individually or in combination to trigger pH independent fusion of the viral envelope with the host cell plasma membrane. The virus itself is transmitted by direct contact and replicates in the skin or mucosal membranes before infecting cells of the nervous system for which HSV has particular tropism. It exhibits both a lytic and a latent function. The lytic cycle results in viral replication and cell death. The latent function allows for the virus to be maintained in the host for an extremely long period of time.

HSV can be modified for the delivery of nucleic acids to cells by producing a vector that exhibits only the latent function for long term gene maintenance. HSV vectors are useful for nucleic acid delivery because they allow for a large DNA insert of up to or greater than 20 kilobases they can be produced with extremely high titers and they have been shown to express nucleic acids for a long period of time in the central nervous system as long as the lytic cycle does not occur.

In other particular embodiments of the present invention the delivery vector of interest is a retrovirus. Retroviruses normally bind to a virus specific cell surface receptor e.g. CD4 for HIV CAT for MLV E ecotropic Murine leukemic virus E RAM1 GLVR2 for murine leukemic virus A MLV A GLVR1 for Gibbon Ape leukemia virus GALV and Feline leukemia virus B FeLV B . The development of specialized cell lines termed packaging cells which produce only replication defective retroviruses has increased the utility of retroviruses for gene therapy and defective retroviruses are characterized for use in gene transfer for gene therapy purposes for a review see Miller 1990 76 271 . A replication defective retrovirus can be packaged into virions which can be used to infect a target cell through the use of a helper virus by standard techniques.

Yet another suitable vector is a poxvirus vector. These viruses are very complex containing more than 100 proteins although the detailed structure of the virus is presently unknown. Extracellular forms of the virus have two membranes while intracellular particles only have an inner membrane. The outer surface of the virus is made up of lipids and proteins that surround the biconcave core. Poxviruses are antigenically complex inducing both specific and cross reacting antibodies after infection. Poxvirus receptors are not presently known but it is likely that there exists more than one given the tropism of poxvirus for a wide range of cells. Poxvirus gene expression is well studied due to the interest in using vaccinia virus as a vector for expression of nucleic acids.

In addition to viral transfer methods such as those illustrated above non viral methods can also be employed. Many non viral methods of nucleic acid transfer rely on normal mechanisms used by mammalian cells for the uptake and intracellular transport of macromolecules. In particular embodiments non viral nucleic acid delivery systems rely on endocytic pathways for the uptake of the nucleic acid molecule by the targeted cell. Exemplary nucleic acid delivery systems of this type include liposomal derived systems poly lysine conjugates and artificial viral envelopes.

Plasmid vectors can be used in the practice of the present invention. Naked plasmids can be introduced into muscle cells by injection into the tissue. Expression can extend over many months although the number of positive cells is typically low Wolff et al. 1989 247 247 . Cationic lipids have been demonstrated to aid in introduction of nucleic acids into some cells in culture Felgner and Ringold 1989 337 387 . Injection of cationic lipid plasmid DNA complexes into the circulation of mice has been shown to result in expression of the DNA in lung Brigham et al. 1989 298 278 . One advantage of plasmid DNA is that it can be introduced into non replicating cells.

As indicated above the components of the reconstituted complex can be produced in and optionally purified from cultured cells or organisms expressing one or more heterologous nucleic acids encoding the proteins of the complex for a variety of purposes e.g. screening assays to identify compounds for modulating HTMase activity or cancer detecting cancer large scale protein production and or research purposes .

Generally the isolated nucleic acid is incorporated into an expression vector viral or nonviral as described above . Expression vectors compatible with various host cells are well known in the art and contain suitable elements for transcription and translation of nucleic acids. Typically an expression vector contains an expression cassette which includes in the 5 to 3 direction a promoter a coding sequence encoding an EED EZH2 SUZ12 RbAp48 and or AEBP2 subunit operatively associated with the promoter and optionally a termination sequence including a stop signal for RNA polymerase and a polyadenylation signal for polyadenylase.

Expression vectors can be designed for expression of polypeptides in prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells. For example polypeptides can be expressed in bacterial cells such as insect cells e.g. in the baculovirus expression system yeast cells or mammalian cells. Some suitable host cells are discussed further in Goeddel Methods in Enzymology 185 Academic Press San Diego Calif. 1990 . Examples of vectors for expression in yeast include pYepSecl Baldari et al. 1987 6 229 234 pMFa Kurjan and Herskowitz 1982 30 933 943 pJRY88 Schultz et al. 1987 54 113 123 and pYES2 Invitrogen Corporation San Diego Calif. . Baculovirus vectors available for expression of nucleic acids to produce proteins in cultured insect cells e.g. Sf 9 cells are described above and include the pAc series Smith et al. 1983 3 2156 2165 and the pVL series Lucklow V. A. and Summers M. d. 1989 170 31 39 .

Examples of mammalian expression vectors include pCDM8 Seed 1987 329 840 and pMT2PC Kaufman et al. 1987 6 187 195 . When used in mammalian cells the expression vector s control functions are often provided by viral regulatory elements. For example commonly used promoters are derived from polyoma adenovirus 2 cytomegalovirus and Simian Virus 40.

Vectors can be introduced into prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells via conventional transformation or transfection techniques. As used herein the terms transformation and transfection refer to a variety of art recognized techniques for introducing foreign nucleic acids e.g. DNA into a host cell including calcium phosphate or calcium chloride co precipitation DEAE dextran mediated transfection lipofection electroporation microinjection DNA loaded liposomes lipofectamine DNA complexes cell sonication gene bombardment using high velocity microprojectiles and viral mediated transfection. Suitable methods for transforming or transfecting host cells can be found in Sambrook et al. Molecular Cloning A Laboratory Manual 2nd Edition Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory press 1989 and other laboratory manuals.

When producing stably transformed cells often only a small fraction of cells in particular mammalian cells integrate a foreign DNA into their genome. In order to identify and select these integrants a nucleic acid that encodes a selectable marker e.g. resistance to antibiotics can be introduced into the host cells along with the nucleic acid of interest. Preferred selectable markers include those that confer resistance to drugs such as G418 hygromycin and methotrexate. Nucleic acids encoding a selectable marker can be introduced into a host cell on the same vector as that comprising the nucleic acid of interest or can be introduced on a separate vector. Cells stably transfected with the introduced nucleic acid can be identified by drug selection e.g. cells that have incorporated the selectable marker gene will survive while the other cells die .

Recombinant proteins can also be produced in a transgenic plant in which the isolated nucleic acid encoding the protein is inserted into the nuclear or plastidic genome. Plant transformation is known as the art. See in general Vol. 153 Recombinant DNA Part D 1987 Wu and Grossman Eds. Academic Press and European Patent Application EP 693554.

Foreign nucleic acids can be introduced into plant cells or protoplasts by several methods. For example nucleic acid can be mechanically transferred by microinjection directly into plant cells by use of micropipettes. Foreign nucleic acid can also be transferred into a plant cell by using polyethylene glycol which forms a precipitation complex with the genetic material that is taken up by the cell Paszkowski et al. 1984 3 2712 22 . Foreign nucleic acid can be introduced into a plant cell by electroporation Fromm et al. 1985 82 5824 . In this technique plant protoplasts are electroporated in the presence of plasmids or nucleic acids containing the relevant genetic construct. Electrical impulses of high field strength reversibly permeabilize biomembranes allowing the introduction of the plasmids. Electroporated plant protoplasts reform the cell wall divide and form a plant callus. Selection of the transformed plant cells comprising the foreign nucleic acid can be accomplished using phenotypic markers.

Cauliflower mosaic virus CaMV can be used as a vector for introducing foreign nucleic acids into plant cells Hohn et al. 1982 Molecular Biology of Plant Tumors Academic Press New York pp. 549 560 Howell U.S. Pat. No. 4 407 956 . CaMV viral DNA genome is inserted into a parent bacterial plasmid creating a recombinant DNA molecule which can be propagated in bacteria. The recombinant plasmid can be further modified by introduction of the desired DNA sequence. The modified viral portion of the recombinant plasmid is then excised from the parent bacterial plasmid and used to inoculate the plant cells or plants.

High velocity ballistic penetration by small particles can be used to introduce foreign nucleic acid into plant cells. Nucleic acid is disposed within the matrix of small beads or particles or on the surface Klein et al. 1987 327 70 73 . Although typically only a single introduction of a new nucleic acid segment is required this method also provides for multiple introductions.

A nucleic acid can be introduced into a plant cell by infection of a plant cell an explant a meristem or a seed with transformed with the nucleic acid. Under appropriate conditions the transformed plant cells are grown to form shoots roots and develop further into plants. The nucleic acids can be introduced into plant cells for example by means of the Ti plasmid of . The Ti plasmid is transmitted to plant cells upon infection by and is stably integrated into the plant genome Horsch et al. 1984 Inheritance of Functional Foreign Genes in Plants 233 496498 Fraley et al. 1983 80 4803 .

Purification of Recombinant EED EZH2 Complex and Subcomplexes. Ezh2 cDNA was cloned into BamHI and XhoI sites pFASTBAC INVITROGEN Carlsbad Calif. without FLAG . EED cDNA was cloned into EcoRI and XhoI sites of an N terminal FLAG tagged vector pFASTBAC SUZ12 and AEBP2 cDNAs were inserted into EcoRI and NotI sites of the same vector. Baculovirus for RbAp48 are established in the art Zhang et al. 1999 13 1924 1935 . Each baculovirus expressing a different component was generated and amplified following the manufacturer s protocol. To purify the recombinant EED EZH2 complex different baculoviruses were used to co infect SF9 cells. After two days of infection cells were collected and resuspended in F lysis buffer 20 mM Tris pH 7.9 500 mM NaCl 4 mM MgCl 0.4 mM EDTA 2 mM DTT 20 glycerol 0.1 NP 40 with proteinase inhibitors. Cells were homogenized with a pestle three times 10 strokes each in a period of 30 minutes. The supernatant was recovered by centrifuging at 11 000 rpm for 10 minutes. The supernatant was adjusted to 300 mM NaCl by adding dilution buffer 20 mM Tris pH 7.9 10 glycerol then incubated with the M2 FLAG agarose Sigma St. Louis Mo. equilibrated with F lysis buffer for 4 hours at 4 C. Upon removal of all unbound protein with F washing buffer 20 mM Tris pH 7.9 150 mM NaCl 2 mM MgCl 0.2 mM EDTA 1 mM DTT 15 glycerol 0.01 NP 40 bound proteins were eluted with FLAG peptide 0.2 mg mL for 20 minutes at room temperature then the eluted complexes were further purified through a gel filtration S200 or SUPEROSE 6 column. Using this protocol milligram quantities of reconstituted complex were generated. Moreover while co expression resulted in an active reconstituted EED EZH2 complex expression of each component separately i.e. in individual cells and subsequent mixing was not found to produce an active complex.

HMTase Assay Substrate Preparation and Antibodies. Histone methylation assays were performed in accordance with well established methods Wang et al. 2001 293 853 857 . Substrates for the HMTase assay including oligonucleosomes mononucleosomes and core histone were purified from chicken blood using established protocols Fang et al. 2003 377 213 226 . Wild type and mutant recombinant histone H3 were expressed and purified according to known methods Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 . Antibodies against EZH2 SUZ12 2mK27 3mK27 3mK9 and 1mK27 are known Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Peters et al. 2003 12 1577 1589 Plath et al. 2003 300 131 135 .

Plasmids and GST Pull Down Assay. Full length AEBP2 cDNA was cloned by PCR amplification from a HeLa cDNA library and the sequence was verified by DNA sequence analysis. Full length cDNAs for Ezh2 EED SUZ12 RbAp48 AEBP2 and their deletions were inserted into pCITE vector for in vitro translation using the rabbit reticulocyte lysate kit according to the manufacturer s instructions PROMEGA Madison Wis. . Full length cDNAs for SUZ12 EED RbAp48 and AEBP2 were also cloned into pGEX KG vector for the production of GST fusion proteins. About 3 g of GST or GST fusion proteins were bound to 10 L of glutathione immobilized agarose beads Sigma St. Louis Mo. and incubated with in vitro translated products in 500 L buffer A 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.9 0.5 mM EDTA 1 mM dithiothreitol 0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride 10 glycerol containing 150 mM KCl and 0.05 NP 40. After incubation at 4 C. for 2 hours the beads were washed three times with buffer A containing 300 mM KCl and 0.05 NP 40 and then washed once in buffer A containing 50 mM KCl before being subjected to SDS PAGE and autoradiogram analysis.

SUZ12 Knock Down Cell Line and Growth Analyses. HeLa cells were cultured in Dulbecco s Modified Eagle Medium DMEM supplied with 10 fetal bovine serum FBS . A desired 64 bp oligonucleotide that targets SUZ12 was cloned into pHTPsiRNA vector Wang et al. 2003 Mol. Cell 12 475 487 . The two oligonucleotides used in generating the stem loop RNA that target SUZ12 were 5 GAT CCC C T TCA AGA GA TTT TTG GAA A 3 SEQ ID NO 1 and 5 TCG ATT TCC AAA AA TCT CTT GAA GG G 3 SEQ ID NO 2 wherein stem structures are underlied. The SUZ12 siRNA vector was transfected into HeLa cells by EFFECTENE INVITROGEN Carlsbad Calif. . Stable transfectants were selected in the presence of 2 g mL puromycin. Cells derived from these transfectants were used for western blot analysis and real time RT PCR analysis. For cell growth analyses 4 10cells were seeded in 12 well plates. After 24 48 and 96 hours in culture cells were trypsinized collected in triplicate and counted by trypan blue staining.

Real Time PCR and ChIP Assays. Real time PCR was performed in triplicate using SYBR Green PCR Master Mix and the ABI prism 7900 sequence detection system. Quantitative PCR reactions were performed under conditions standardized for each primer. Standard curves were generated using 10 fold dilutions of standard plasmids. To compare the relative amount of target in different samples all values were normalized to the appropriately quantified GAPDH control. The primers used in quantitative PCR were SUZ12 cDNA primers 5 AAA CGA AAT CGT GAG GAT GG 3 SEQ ID NO 3 and 5 CCA TTT CCT GCA TGG CTA CT 3 SEQ ID NO 4 HoxC6 cDNA primers 5 CCA GGA CCA GAA AGC CAG TA 3 SEQ ID NO 5 and 5 GGT CTG GTA CCG CGA GTA GA 3 SEQ ID NO 6 HoxC8 cDNA primers 5 CTC AGG CTA CCA GCA GAA CC 3 SEQ ID NO 7 and 5 GAG CCC CAT AAA GGG ACT GT 3 SEQ ID NO 8 and HoxA9 cDNA primers 5 TGC AGC TTC CAG TCC AAG G 3 SEQ ID NO 9 and 5 GTA GGG GTG GTG GTG ATG GT 3 SEQ ID NO 10 .

For ChIP assays approximately 2 10HeLa cells in 150 mm dishes were treated with DMEM containing 1 formaldehyde for 10 minutes. Crosslinking was stopped by the addition of 0.125 M glycine for 10 minutes. After washing twice with phosphate buffered saline PBS the cells were resuspended in 300 L of cell lysis buffer 10 mM HEPES pH 7.9 0.5 NP 40 1.5 mM MgCl 10 mM KCl 0.5 mM DTT and held on ice for 10 minutes. The cells were subsequently centrifuged at 4 000 rpm for 5 minutes resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer 20 mM HEPES pH 7.9 25 glycerol 0.5 NP 40 0.42 M NaCl 1.5 mM MgCl 0.2 mM EDTA containing protease inhibitors and incubated at 4 C. for 20 minutes to extract nuclear proteins. Extracted chromatin was sonicated into fragments having an average length of 0.5 3 kb. After centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 10 minutes the supernatants were diluted in an equal volume of dilution buffer containing 1 TRITON X 100 2 mM EDTA 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.9 50 mM NaCl and protease inhibitors. ChIP assays were then performed with indicated antibodies. ChIP DNA was detected using standard PCR with the following primer pairs for the four different regions in HoxA9 A 5 TCC ACC TTT CTC TCG ACA GCA C 3 SEQ ID NO 11 and 5 GTG GGA GGC TCA GGA TGG AAG 3 SEQ ID NO 12 B 5 TCG CCA ACC AAA CAC AAC AGT C 3 SEQ ID NO 13 and 5 AAA GGG ATC GTG CCG CTC TAC 3 SEQ ID NO 14 C 5 CTC ACC GAG AGG CAG GTC AAG 3 SEQ ID NO 15 and 5 AGC CTA CCA TCA ACA GTT GTG C 3 SEQ ID NO 16 D 5 GAA CGG CCA CAA CTT CGG AGG 3 SEQ ID NO 17 and 5 CCG GGG AGT CTG CGT GGA G 3 SEQ ID NO 18 .

A multi subunit EED EZH2 ESC E Z complex purified from HeLa cell and embryos was found to methylate nucleosomal histone H3 at lysine 27 Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Czermin et al. 2002 111 185 196 Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 2905 Muller et al. 2002 111 197 208 . The EED EZH2 complex was found to be composed of EZH2 SUZ12 EED RbAp48 and AEBP2 Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 . To dissect the function of individual subunits and to obtain large amounts of purified enzyme complex for detailed functional analyses it was determined whether the enzymatic activity could be reconstituted using recombinant proteins. To this end Sf9 cells were co infected with baculoviruses expressing FLAG EED EZH2 SUZ12 RbAp48 and AEBP2. FLAG EED and associated proteins were purified by affinity chromatography followed by gel filtration through which free FLAG EED and partial complex were removed from the five component complex . Histone methyltransferase assay and silver staining of an SDS polyacrylamide gel containing the column fractions indicated that the five components co purify with the enzymatic activity as a protein complex of about 400 kDa . To assess the HMTase activity of the reconstituted complex relative to that of the native EED EZH2 complex the fractions between 50 and 53 were pooled and different amounts of the pooled recombinant complex were compared with fixed amounts of the native EED EZH2 complex. Results shown in demonstrate that the reconstituted complex and the native complex had comparable HMTase activity when equal amounts of enzyme were compared lane 1 with lanes 3 and 4 . To characterize the reconstituted complex further different forms of histone H3 were subjected to methylation. As with native complex Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 the preferred substrate for the reconstituted enzyme complex was histone H3 in oligonucleosome form . Moreover a reconstituted complex containing other isoforms of EED Kuzmichev et al. 2004 14 2 183 93 exhibits HMTase activity. Accordingly a reconstituted EED EZH2 complex and a native complex have similar enzymatic activity and substrate specificity.

Of the five components present in the complex EZH2 is believed to be the catalytic subunit because it is a SET domain containing protein. It is known that EZH2 and EED interact directly Sewalt et al. 1998 18 3586 3595 van Lohuizen et al. 1998 Mol. Cell Biol. 18 3572 3579 therefore the precise spatial relationship among components of the complex and subcomplexes was determined. Towards this end individual components with the exception of EZH2 which could not be expressed in were expressed as GST fusion proteins and used in GST pull down assays. Consistent with previous reports Sewalt et al. 1998 18 3586 3595 van Lohuizen et al. 1998 Mol. Cell Biol. 18 3572 3579 EZH2 was found to interact strongly with EED but it did not seem to directly contact any of the other subunits under these assay conditions panel 2 . In addition to EZH2 EED also interacted with SUZ12 and AEBP2 lane 3 . RbAp48 appeared to strongly interact with SUZ12 last panel lane 2 and weakly with AEBP2 and EED panels 4 and 5 lane 4 . Unexpectedly AEBP2 was capable of self association panel 5 lane 5 and this ability appeared to be important for its interaction with RbAp48 since immobilized GST RbAp48 could pull down AEBP2 panel 4 lane 4 but immobilized GST AEBP2 which could not self associate could not pull down RbAp48 last panel lane 5 . All the interactions were specific as parallel pull down assays using GST alone failed to detect the interactions lane 6 . These interaction studies indicate that EZH2 associates with other components through EED which in turn interacts with SUZ12 and AEBP2 both of which can interact with RbAp48 .

AEBP2 is a zinc finger protein originally identified as a transcriptional repressor He et al. 1999 274 14678 14684 . Although it was identified as an integral component in a purified EED EZH2 complex Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 it was not present in a similar purified complex Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 2905 . Given its ability to incorporate into the complex and to interact with multiple subunits of the complex panel 5 the interaction of AEBP2 with SUZ12 and RbAp48 was further characterized. GST pull down assays using in vitro transcribed translated full length and deletion mutants of AEBP2 demonstrated that the N terminal region of AEBP2 residues 1 87 was involved in the RbAp48 interaction compare the middle two panels while a C terminal region residues 144 198 was involved in the SUZ12 interaction compare the first two panels . These studies in combination with the functional studies disclosed herein indicate that AEBP2 is an integral component of the EED EZH2 complex.

Having defined the spatial relationship among the five components the minimum components required for the enzymatic activity were determined. Given that Ezh2 and Eed are both required for histone H3 K27 methylation in vivo Erhardt et al. 2003 130 4235 4248 Su et al. 2003 4 2 124 3 and based on the physical interactions defined in subcomplexes were reconstituted by omitting AEBP2 RbAp48 and SUZ12 individually or in combination. Using a two step purification procedure similar to that outlined in EED EZH2 sub complexes with four omit AEBP2 three omit AEBP2 and RbAp48 and two omit AEBP2 RbAp48 and SUZ12 components were reconstituted. Silver staining revealed that these reconstituted sub complexes were near homogeneity . To evaluate the relative HMTase activities of these purified complexes equal molar amounts of the complexes as indicated by western blot analysis of EZH2 top panel were used to methylate equal amounts of nucleosomal substrates second panel . Results shown in bottom two panels indicate that a minimum of three components containing EED EZH2 and SUZ12 were required for the HMTase activity compare lanes 3 and 4 . Addition of RbAp48 to the three component complex increased the incorporation of SUZ12 compare lanes 2 and 3 resulting in an increased enzymatic activity particularly at a higher enzyme concentration . Addition of AEBP2 to the four component complex significantly increased the HMTase activity compare lanes 1 and 2 . Co infection of EED EZH2 and RbAp48 failed to form a stable complex data not shown indicating that incorporation of RbAp48 into the complex depends on its interaction with SUZ12 . In addition omission of SUZ12 also failed to form a four component complex.

HMTase activity of the reconstituted complexes was evaluated using a wide range of enzyme concentrations . Although significant HMTase activity was detected at 5 nM enzyme concentration when the five component complex was used no activity was detected when the two component complex was used even at a 160 nM enzyme concentration level. A significant difference in enzymatic activity was observed when the five component and four component complexes were compared. Thus EZH2 EED and SUZ12 are the minimum components required for HMTase activity and AEBP2 stimulates the HMTase activity of the four component EED EZH2 complex.

Independent purification and characterization of EED EZH2 ESC E Z HMTase complexes has been conducted Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Czermin et al. 2002 111 185 196 Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 2905 Muller et al. 2002 111 197 208 . However the properties of these purified enzyme complexes appear to have some differences. For example while one purified EED EZH2 complex has been shown to have a clear preference for oligonucleosome over octomer substrates Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 a similar HeLa complex devoid of AEBP2 has been shown to have the opposite preference Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 2905 . To determine whether the presence of AEBP2 in the complex could alter the substrate preference substrate preference was analyzed using the reconstituted EED EZH2 complex devoid of AEBP2. Results shown in indicate that like the AEBP2 containing complex the four component EED EZH2 complex also shows clear preference for oligonucleosome over octomer. Similar substrate preference was also observed with the three component EED EZH2 complex data not shown . Therefore while neither AEBP2 nor RbAp48 are involved in substrate specificity determination EZH2 or its associated EED and SUZ12 appear to be involved in this process.

In addition to substrate preference there is also some discrepancy about the lysine residues that the enzyme complexes methylate. Although the human EED EZH2 complex and its ESC E Z counterpart were reported to methylate histone H3 K27 only Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Muller et al. 2002 111 197 208 histone H3 K9 HMTase activity was also reported for similar complexes Czermin et al. 2002 111 185 196 Kuzmichev et al. 2002 16 2893 2905 . This discrepancy is likely the result of either subtle differences in the complex composition for example the presence or absence of AEBP2 or the minor histone H3 K9 HMTase activity was due to contamination. To differentiate these two possibilities it was determined which lysine residues were methylated by the different reconstituted complexes. To this end three levels of recombinant wild type or mutant histone H3 were subjected to a histone methyltransferase assay using the enzyme complexes containing five four or three components. As with the native complex Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 mutation on K27 resulted in undetectable HMTase activity for the five component complex left column . Similar results were obtained when the four or three component complex was used middle two panels . Therefore AEBP2 does not limit the ability of the four component EED EZH2 complex to methylate histone H3 K9 however mutation on histone H3 K9 does appear to cause a small reduction in the ability of histone H3 to serve as a substrate for the reconstituted EED EZH2 complexes.

Having established a role for SUZ12 in histone H3 K27 methylation in vitro the in vivo function was analyzed. A stable SUZ12 knock down cell line was generated using a vector based siRNA approach see e.g. Wang et al. 2003 12 475 487 . Characterization of the cell line indicated that about 75 knock down was achieved at the protein level compare lanes 3 and 5 . Quantitative RT PCR revealed that about 65 knock down was achieved at the mRNA level right panel . Like that of siRNA transfection for the EZH2 and EED components of the EED EZH2 complex Bracken et al. 2003 22 5323 5335 Varambally et al. 2002 419 624 9 vector based SUZ12 knock down resulted in changes in cellular morphology and growth . To evaluate the effects of SUZ12 knock down on histone H3 K27 methylation in vivo equivalent amounts of histones isolated from the SUZ12 knock down cells and cells from a parallel empty vector transfection were subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies specific for methylated lysine 9 or lysine 27 of histone H3. Results shown in indicated that SUZ12 knock down resulted in a significant decrease in the trimethyl K27 level but had little affect on the trimethyl K9 level third and fourth panels . Unexpectedly an increase in monomethyl K27 and a moderate decrease in dimethyl K27 were also observed the top two panels . The fact that SUZ12 knock down did not affect EZH2 level in combination with the requirement of SUZ12 for histone H3 K27 methyltransferase activity in vitro indicates that SUZ12 directly contributes to histone H3 K27 methylation.

Studies in have established a role for histone H3 K27 methylation in Hox gene silencing Cao et al. 2002 298 1039 1043 Muller et al. 2002 111 197 208 . Data presented herein indicate that SUZ12 is important for histone H3 K27 methylation in vitro and in vivo. To determine whether histone H3 K27 methylation is involved in Hox gene silencing in mammalian cells like that in expression of EED EZH2 target genes in the SUZ12 knock down cells was evaluated. The expression level of several Hox genes including HoxC6 HoxC8 and HoxA9 in the knock down cells and the parallel control cells were examined by real time RT PCR. Results shown in demonstrate that SUZ12 knock down resulted in derepression of HoxC8 and HoxA9 but had little effect on HoxC6.

As SUZ12 knock down had a dramatic effect on HoxA9 the relationship between SUZ12 knock down histone H3 K27 methylation and HoxA9 derepression were examined. Accordingly SUZ12 binding and histone H3 K27 methylation at different locations of the human HoxA9 gene were analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation ChIP using antibodies against SUZ12 and trimethyl K27. As controls for the ChIP assays and for antibody specificity equal amounts of IgG and anti histone H3 dimethyl K4 antibodies were included. Representative regions that covered the promoter B intron C and downstream D of the gene were analyzed. In addition a region A about 4 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site which shows a high degree of sequence homology between human and mouse genes was also analyzed. Results shown in indicate that SUZ12 and 3mK27 were present preferentially in regions A lanes 4 and 5 and B lanes 9 and 10 when compared with that present in regions C lanes 14 and 15 and D lanes 19 and 20 in the mock knock down cells top panels . Consistent with a role for SUZ12 in histone H3 K27 methylation knock down SUZ12 resulted in a significant decrease in SUZ12 binding concomitant with a loss of histone H3 3mK27 in regions A and B particularly in region A lanes 4 and 5 compare top and bottom panels . As three YY1 binding sites were identified in region A this region may have functions similar to that of the Polycomb responsive element PRE . Therefore loss of direct SUZ12 binding correlates with a loss of histone H3 K27 methylation and derepression of the HoxA9. Very little change in histone H3 K4 methylation believed to be a marker for gene activation was observed. Collectively the data indicate that SUZ12 is critical for the enzymatic activity and silencing function of the EED EZH2 complex.

Histone substrate was coated in the wells of a 96 well plate and reaction mixture containing reconstituted EED EZH2 complex and a test compound were added to the wells . The wells were washed H3 mK antibody was added and ELISA was performed to determine whether the test compound inhibited the HMTase activity of the reconstituted complex. In this primary screen 22 of 20 000 compounds screened exhibited inhibitory activity. The 22 compounds were further tested for specificity to the reconstituted EED EZH2 complex as compared to other HMTases.

The foregoing is illustrative of the present invention and is not to be construed as limiting thereof. The invention is defined by the following claims with equivalents of the claims to be included therein.

