---

title: Managing removal of media titles from a list
abstract: The invention can be viewed as a system for providing media information to a user via an interactive media services client device coupled to a programmable television services server device. A method of the preferred embodiment of the present invention includes receiving user input and excluding one or more media titles from a media title list based on the user input.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08069259&OS=08069259&RS=08069259
owner: 
number: 08069259
owner_city: 
owner_country: 
publication_date: 20051006
---
This application is a continuation of application Ser. No. 09 692 986 filed Oct. 20 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 978 310 which is a continuation in part of application Ser. No. 09 590 488 filed on Jun. 9 2000 which are entirely incorporated herein by reference.

This invention relates in general to television systems and more particularly to the field of media on demand.

With recent advances in digital transmission technology cable television systems are now capable of providing much more than the traditional analog broadcast video. In implementing enhanced programming the home communication terminal HCT otherwise known as the settop box has become an important computing device for accessing video services and navigating a subscriber through a maze of available services. In addition to supporting traditional analog broadcast video functionality digital HCTs or DHCTs now also support an increasing number of two way digital services such as video on demand.

Typically a DHCT is connected to a cable or satellite television network and includes hardware and software necessary to provide the functionality of the digital television system at the client s site. Preferably some of the software executed by a DHCT is downloaded and or updated via the cable television network. Each DHCT also typically includes a processor communication components and memory and is connected to a television or other display device such as a personal computer. While many conventional DHCTs are stand alone devices that are externally connected to a television a DHCT and or its functionality may be integrated into a television or personal computer as will be appreciated by those of ordinary skill in the art.

DHCTs are capable of providing users with a very large number and variety of purchasable media rentals and or non purchasable on demand media. Given the vast number of years that film and television studios have produced movies television programs and audio programs copious media titles can be offered for convenient on demand viewing. As the number of available on demand media increases it can become inconvenient and time consuming for users to continually browse through unwanted media titles in order to find the ones that they like. Therefore there exists a need to make it easier and more convenient for users to browse through available media titles.

The invention can be viewed as a system for providing media information to a user via an interactive media services client device coupled to a programmable television services server device. A method of the preferred embodiment of the present invention includes receiving user input and excluding one or more media titles from a media title list based on the user input.

The present invention now will be described more fully hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings in which preferred embodiments of the invention are shown. This invention may however be embodied in many different forms and should not be construed as limited to the embodiments set forth herein rather these embodiments are provided so that this disclosure will be thorough and complete and will fully convey the scope of the invention to those skilled in the art.

The present invention is generally implemented as part of a cable television system CTS . Hence an illustrative CTS and its operation will be described initially. shows a block diagram view of a CTS which is generally a high quality reliable and integrated network system that features video audio voice and data services to DHCT users. Although depicts a high level view of a CTS it should be appreciated that a plurality of cable television systems can tie together a plurality of regional networks into an integrated global network so that DHCT users can receive content provided from anywhere in the world.

The CTS delivers broadcast video signals as digitally formatted signals in addition to delivering traditional broadcast analog video signals. Furthermore the system can support one way broadcast services as well as both one way data services and two way media and data services. The two way operation of the network allows for user interactivity with services such as Pay Per View programming Near Video On Demand NVOD programming according to any of several known NVOD implementation methods View on Demand VOD programming according to any of several known VOD implementation methods and interactive applications such as Internet connections and interactive media Guide IMG applications.

The CTS also provides the interfaces network control transport control session control and servers to access content and services and distributes content and services to DHCT users. As shown in a typical CTS comprises a headend hubs an HFC access network and users digital home communication terminals DHCTs . It should be appreciated that although a single component e.g. a headend is illustrated in a CTS can feature a plurality of any one of the illustrated components or may be configured with alternative embodiments for any one of the individual components or with yet other additional components not enumerated above. A content provider not shown transmits media content to a headend for further transmission to users downstream in the network.

Content provided by a content provider is communicated by the content provider to one or more headends . From those headends the content is then communicated over a communications network that includes a plurality of HFC access networks only one HFC access network is illustrated . The HFC access network typically comprises a plurality of HFC nodes each of which may serve a local geographical area. The hub connects to the HFC node through a fiber portion of the HFC access network . The HFC node is connected to a tap which is connected to a network interface unit NIU which is connected to a DHCT . The NIU is normally located at a user s property and provides a transparent interface between the HFC node and the users internal wiring. Coaxial cables are typically used to couple nodes taps and NIUs because the electrical signals can be easily repeated with radio frequency RF amplifiers.

As the high level operations of many of the functions of CTSs are well known to those of skill in the art further description of the overall CTS of will not be contained herein. It will be appreciated however that the CTS shown in is merely illustrative and should not be construed as implying any limitations upon the scope of the present invention.

The DNCS provides complete management monitoring and control of the network s elements and broadcast services provided to users. In one implementation the DNCS uses a data insertion multiplexer and a data QAM to insert in band broadcast file system BFS data into an MPEG 2 transport stream that is broadcast and received via DHCT s communication interface and tuner system . The DNCS also contains a session manager that uses Digital Storage Media Command and Control DSMCC protocol to set up and maintain MOD sessions. The session manager processes user to network U N session signaling messages manages allocation of session related network resources supports network management operations acts as a point of contact to the network for the DHCT s in the network to establish individual sessions and supports MOD services by providing the signaling interface to establish maintain and release client initiated exclusive sessions.

A service application manager SAM server is a server component of a client server pair of components with the client component being located at the DHCT . Together the client server SAM components provide a system in which the user can access services which are identified by an application to run and a parameter such as particular data content specific to that service. The client server SAM components also manage the life cycle of the applications on the system including the definition activation and suspension of services they provide and the downloading of the applications into the DHCT as necessary.

Applications on both the headend and the DHCT can access the data stored in a broadcast file system BFS server in a similar manner to a file system found on operating systems. The BFS server is a part of a broadcast file system that has a counterpart BFS client module in a DHCT connected to the network . The BFS server repeatedly sends data for applications on a data carousel not shown over a period of time in cyclical repeated fashion so that a DHCT that is in need of reading any particular data file or parts thereof may receive it when requested by a user or one or more of its internal running processes.

A VOD content manager is responsible for managing the content on the VOD content servers . The MOD server application controls both the VOD content manager and the VOD content servers and utilizes them to help deliver the video and audio streams that make up VOD services. In one embodiment an MOD content manager and MOD content servers not shown could run respectively in parallel to the VOD content manager and VOD content servers to manage other types of on demand media content. In an alternate embodiment an MOD content manager replaces the VOD content manager and the MOD content servers replaces the VOD content servers . The QAM modulators that comprise the QAM group receive the MPEG 2 transport streams from the VOD content servers convert them into encrypted RF signals at a specified frequency channel and transmit them to a DHCT via the network .

The QPSK modem is responsible for transporting the out of band IP internet protocol datagram traffic between the distribution headend and a DHCT . Data from the QPSK modem is routed by headend router within the headend . The headend router is also responsible for delivering upstream application traffic to the various server applications .

The DHCT may also include one or more wireless or wired interfaces also called ports for receiving and or transmitting data to other devices. For instance the DHCT may feature USB Universal Serial Bus Ethernet for connection to a computer IEEE 1394 for connection to media devices in an entertainment center serial and or parallel ports. The user inputs may for example be provided by a computer or transmitter with buttons or keys located either on the exterior of the terminal or by a hand held remote control device or keyboard that includes user actuated buttons.

In one implementation the DHCT includes system memory which includes flash memory and dynamic random access memory DRAM for storing various applications modules and data for execution and use by the processor . Basic functionality of the DHCT is provided by an operating system that is primarily stored in flash memory . Among other things the operating system includes at least one resource manager that provides an interface to resources of the DHCT such as for example computing resources.

One or more programmed software applications herein referred to as applications are executed by utilizing the computing resources in the DHCT . Applications stored in flash memory or DRAM are executed by processor e.g. a central processing unit or digital signal processor under the auspices of the operating system . Data required as input by an application is stored in DRAM or flash memory and read by processor as need be during the course of the application s execution. Input data may be data stored in DRAM by a secondary application or other source either internal or external to the DHCT or possibly anticipated by the application and thus created with the application at the time it was generated as a software application in which case it is stored in flash memory . Data generated by an application is stored in DRAM by processor during the course of the application s execution. DRAM also includes application memory that various applications may use for storing and or retrieving data.

An application referred to as navigator is also resident in flash memory for providing a navigation framework for services provided by the DHCT . The navigator registers for and in some cases reserves certain user inputs related to navigational keys such as channel increment decrement last channel favorite channel etc. The client applications may be resident in flash memory or downloaded into DRAM . The navigator also provides users with television related menu options that correspond to DHCT functions such as for example providing an interactive program guide blocking a channel or a group of channels from being displayed in a channel menu and displaying a video on demand purchase list.

The flash memory also contains a platform library . The platform library is a collection of utilities useful to applications such as a timer manager a compression manager a configuration manager an HTML parser a database manager a widget toolkit a string manager and other utilities not shown . These utilities are accessed by applications via application programming interfaces APIs as necessary so that each application does not have to contain these utilities. Two components of the platform library that are shown in are a window manager and a service application manager SAM client .

The window manager provides a mechanism for implementing the sharing of the screen regions and user input. The window manager on the DHCT is responsible for as directed by one or more applications implementing the creation display and de allocation of the limited DHCT screen resources. It allows multiple applications to share the screen by assigning ownership of screen regions or windows. The window manager also maintains among other things a user input registry in DRAM so that when a user enters a key or a command via the remote control device or another input device such as a keyboard or mouse the user input registry is accessed to determine which of various applications running on the DHCT should receive data corresponding to the input key and in which order. As an application is executed it registers a request to receive certain user input keys or commands. When the user presses a key corresponding to one of the commands on the remote control device the command is received by the receiver and relayed to the processor . The processor dispatches the event to the operating system where it is forwarded to the window manager which ultimately accesses the user input registry and routes data corresponding to the incoming command to the appropriate application.

The SAM client is a client component of a client server pair of components with the server component being located on the headend . A SAM database in DRAM includes a data structure of services and a data structure of channels that are created and updated by the headend . Many services can be defined using the same application component with different parameters. Examples of services include without limitation and in accordance with one implementation presenting television programs available through a WatchTV application pay per view events available through a PPV application digital music not shown media on demand available through an MOD application and an interactive program guide. In general the identification of a service includes the identification of an executable application that provides the service along with a set of application dependent parameters that indicate to the application the service to be provided. As a non limiting example a service of presenting a television program could be executed with a set of parameters to view HBO or with a separate set of parameters to view CNN. Each association of the application component tune video and one parameter component HBO or CNN represents a particular service that has a unique service I.D. The SAM client also interfaces with the resource manager as discussed below to control resources of the DHCT .

Application clients can also be downloaded into DRAM at the request of the SAM client typically in response to a request by the user or in response to a message from the headend. In this non limiting example DRAM contains a media on demand application MOD an e mail application and a web browser application among others not shown . It should be clear to one with ordinary skill in the art that these applications are not limiting and merely serve as examples for this present embodiment of the invention. Furthermore one or more DRAM based applications may as an alternative embodiment be resident in flash memory . These applications and others provided by the cable system operator are top level software entities on the network for providing services to the user.

In one implementation applications executing on the DHCT work with the navigator by abiding by several guidelines. First an application utilizes the SAM client for the provision activation and suspension of services. Second an application shares DHCT resources with other applications and abides by the resource management policies of the SAM client the operating system and the DHCT . Third an application handles situations where resources are only available with navigator intervention. Fourth when an application loses service authorization while providing a service the application suspends the service via the SAM the navigator will reactivate an individual service application when it later becomes authorized . Finally an application client is designed to not have access to certain user input keys reserved by the navigator i.e. power channel volume etc. .

The MOD client application provides the user with lists of available media titles to choose from and with video presentations requested by the user. The MOD client application provides video presentations to the user by engaging preferably in a direct two way IP Internet Protocol connection with VOD content servers . The MOD client application is also responsible for providing title deletion functionality as described below. In an alternative embodiment the title deletion functionality is provided by a separate application that can be selectively aggregated to the MOD client application for purposes of charging separately for that functionality.

An executable program or algorithm corresponding to an operating system OS component or to a client platform component or to a client application or to respective parts thereof can reside in and execute out of DRAM and or flash memory . Likewise data inputted into or outputted from any executable program can reside in DRAM or flash memory . Furthermore an executable program or algorithm corresponding to an OS component or to a client platform component or to a client application or to respective parts thereof can reside in flash memory or in a local storage device connected to DHCT and be transferred into DRAM for execution. Likewise data input for an executable program can reside in flash memory or a storage device and be transferred into DRAM for use by an executable program or algorithm. In addition data outputted by an executable program can be written into DRAM by an executable program or algorithm and be transferred into flash memory or into a storage device for storage purposes. The present invention is not limited by where or how data and or applications are stored or retrieved.

Each of the above mentioned applications comprises executable instructions for implementing logical functions and can be embodied in any computer readable medium for use by or in connection with an instruction execution system apparatus or device such as a computer based system processor containing system or other system that can fetch and execute the instructions. In the context of this document a computer readable medium can be any means that can contain store communicate propagate or transport the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device. The computer readable medium can be for example but not limited to an electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system apparatus device or propagation medium. More specific examples a non exhaustive list of the computer readable medium would include the following an electrical connection electronic having one or more wires a portable computer diskette magnetic a random access memory RAM electronic a read only memory ROM electronic an erasable programmable read only memory EPROM or Flash memory electronic an optical fiber optical and a portable compact disc read only memory CDROM optical . Note that the computer readable medium could even be paper or another suitable medium upon which the program is printed as the program can be electronically captured via for instance optical scanning of the paper or other medium then compiled interpreted or otherwise processed in a suitable manner and then stored in a computer memory.

With continued reference to throughout the remaining figures depicts an example media title deletion window A. As with other window examples discussed below processor executes program instructions of MOD client application that cause it to direct the window manager to create window A via display data that is formatted for television . Processor stores the display data or parts thereof in DRAM as necessary and transfers the display data to a display output system such as RF output system wherein display data is converted to respective television signals and transmitted to television . Of course the scope of the invention also includes any other method of causing the described windows to appear to the user.

The example window A contains a top portion that typically contains one or more headings and a bottom portion that typically illustrates relevant buttons available on the remote control device . Media title list contains media titles that are retrieved by MOD client application from application memory . Information section contains information related to a media title shown in a highlighted title area which in this example is Angela s Ashes . Browsing symbol suggests to the user that the user may use the up and down arrow buttons on the remote control device to browse the media title list and use the select button to request the currently highlighted media title. For example the user may activate the down arrow button on the remote control device in order to cause the media title Any Given Sunday to be displayed in the highlighted title area and then activate the select button in order to request the movie. In an alternative embodiment activating the up an down arrows on the remote control device would result in shifting the highlighted title area rather than shifting the media title list. The user may delete the media title currently shown in the highlighted title area from the media title list by pressing the D button on the remote control device . Instead of a single dedicated key in an input device to invoke the delete functionality in an alternate embodiment a combination of keys pressed simultaneously or in sequential order are designated for deleting a highlighted media title.

In an alternate embodiment the MOD client application comprises a text string matching sub component that enables filtering based on text strings entered by the user for applicable filtering categories. For instance the user can implement a filter to delete titles that feature a disliked leading actor or actress. Upon user selection of filter by leading actor actress in window an intermediate window is displayed to the user for entering alphanumeric characters via an input device. In the absence of a keyboard MOD client application causes display of a window comprising visual information for scrolling and selection of individual letters. A mapping of alphanumeric characters to input device keys can also be displayed to facilitate entering letters with the remote control device. Upon the user entering the name of a leading actor or actress the media client application may proceed to verify correct name spelling by transmitting the input name to the MOD server. The MOD server sends an addressable message to DHCT that gets input as data to MOD client application . The received message data from MOD server confirms the correct spelling rectifies the spelling or suggests close variants of the user entered name. MOD client application interprets the message data and presents it to the user. In the event that variants are displayed to the user the user is prompted to select one of the displayed name variants or to cancel the filtering request.

In an alternate embodiment a filter in function rather than a filter out function is implemented such that filter enactment causes those on demand titles that do not match the filter s criteria to be removed from the media title list. Furthermore when applicable the function of a user implemented filter can be selected by the user to function as a filter in or filter out . Some filters in the set of available filters may not feature user selectable filter in or filter out functionality but merely may default to either a filter in or filter out function. In an alternate embodiment the MOD client application enacts capabilities to the user to filter only existing titles in the current media title list to filter only future title additions to the media title list or both.

In another embodiments MOD client application features the capability of creating a plurality of title removal or fine tuning sets each set designated to respectively retain the title viewing preferences of each individual viewer or member of the family. A title viewing preference set may simply be named with a suffice or prefix number or letter that individual viewers appropriate under personal agreements between themselves or the set may be named by a user inputting alphanumeric strings with an input device such as a keyboard or remote control device.

It should be emphasized that the above described embodiments of the present invention particularly any preferred embodiments are merely possible examples of the implementations merely setting forth a clear understanding of the principles of the inventions. Many variations and modifications may be made to the above described embodiments of the invention without departing substantially from the spirit of the principles of the invention. All such modifications and variations are intended to be included herein within the scope of the disclosure and present invention and protected by the following claims.

