---

title: System for undersea digital acoustic communications
abstract: An undersea communications system in which a message is converted to a redundant fixed-length data packet and transmitted acoustically as a quadrature phase-keyed signal in a frequency band with a continuous pilot signal at a frequency closely adjacent to the frequency band. A receiver uses the received continuous pilot signal to Doppler compensate the incoming quadrature phase keyed signal by estimating any Doppler distortion in the received pilot signal. The resultant redundant signals are then robustly processed coherently and jointly by the adaptive decision feedback equalizer and decoder to provide the original transmitted data.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07310286&OS=07310286&RS=07310286
owner: The United States of America represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07310286
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050711
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefore.

This invention generally relates to bi directional communication systems and more specifically to communication systems capable of conducting bi directional communications in an undersea environment.

Acoustic communications in undersea applications are subject to multi path effects in the water. Multi path effects are produced by acoustic propagations from a transmission point that travel either directly to an underwater receiver or may reflect from the ocean surface and ocean floor or even areas of different temperature and density to create cancellation and distortion of the directly propagated transmission.

Some suggest that these multi path effects can be overcome by the transmission of data over a number of different transmission frequencies. This improves the chances of clear communications as one or more of the transmitted signals may ultimately be received without severe multi path distortion. However such systems tend to be complex and difficult to implement. They also make certain assumptions about transmissions that may not be accurate in an actual operating environment.

There are a number of other approaches for undersea acoustic communications that vary with different applications. United States Letters Patent No. 4 563 758 1986 to Paternostor discloses an underwater communicator device that permits acoustic communications between divers by using a voice synthesizer and an acoustic transducer. A display is provided to visually communicate a message. The diver can communicate stored messages by activating a single key or by keying in an actual message. Other preset messages can also be sent based on different sensors.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 018 114 to Mackelburg et al. discloses another type of acoustic communication system in which an operator has adjustable frequency diversity so data rates can be tailored to specific multi path environments. Transmitted messages are sent with precursor transmission reception synchronization data and transmission parameter data so the receiving communication end can recognize when message data starts by means of tone length as well as frequency diversity in the transmitted message. Timing is extracted from the data to compensate for Doppler shift.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 303 207 to Brady et al. 1994 discloses an acoustic local area network for oceanographic observation and data acquisition. A network node has telemetry equipment for transporting data to a final destination. Each of a plurality of sensors has an acoustic modem to transmit information to the network node. Transmissions are in the form of BPSK input signals. The data channels occupy a bandwidth of about 5 10 kHz while control channels occupy a frequency bandwidth of about 1 KHz.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 523 982 to Dale 1996 discloses communication apparatus for diver to diver communications. This system uses ultra acoustic transmission means and reception means. When the transmission means is activated a predetermined signal is transmitted that is suitable by reception at another diver s apparatus.

U.S. Pat. No. 5 469 403 to Young et al. 1995 discloses a digital sonar system that identifies multi frequency underwater activating sonar signals received from a remote sonar transmitter. A transponder includes a transducer that receives acoustic waves including the activating sonar signal and generates an analog electrical receipt signal. This signal converts to a digital receipt signal that is cross correlated with a digital transmission signal pattern corresponding to the activating sonar signal. A relative peak in the cross correlation value is indicative of the activating sonar having been received by the transponder. In response to identifying the activating sonar signal the transponder transmits a responding multi frequency sonar signal.

U.S. Pat. No. 6 058 071 to Woodall et al. 2000 discloses a magneto inductive submarine communications systems and buoy to provide two way signal communication between a submerged craft such as a submarine and a remote command station that may be airborne on the surface or on land. A buoy released from the submarine and floating on the surface of the ocean and a satellite are included to complete bi directional communications. Messages and commands between the submerged craft and the buoy are communicated by magneto inductive messages signals and magneto inductive command signals in an extremely low frequency to very low frequency ranges. Messaging command communications between the buoy and the satellite to the station are transferred via radio frequency signals or laser emissions.

Each of the foregoing techniques provides some method of undersea communication but not a system that provides reliable undersea communications. United States Letters Patent Nos. 5 469 403 and 5 303 207 disclose bi directional acoustic systems however they do not use incoherent signal processing. What is needed is a system that provides reliable undersea communications at reasonable data rates

Therefore it is an object of this invention to provide an acoustic bi directional undersea communication system.

Another object of this invention is to provide an acoustic bi directional undersea communication system that overcomes many of the problems of multi path effects.

Still another object of this invention is to provide an acoustic undersea bi directional communication system that provides high telemetry rates.

Yet still another object of this invention is to provide an acoustic undersea bi directional communications system that provides reliable communications in both deep water and shallow water environments.

In accordance with one aspect of this invention an undersea communications system includes a transmitter at a transmitting location and a receiver at a receiving location. The transmitter includes a transmitting module for transmitting as an output signal a modulated signal in a given frequency band and for generating a continuous wave pilot signal having a frequency adjacent said given frequency band. The receiver includes a receiver for processing the pilot signal a demodulator a cross correlator that processes the received pilot signal and modulated signal to produce a cross correlated demodulated signal. A decoder converts the cross correlated demodulated signal into a received message signal.

In this specific embodiment the shore site includes a transceiver that receives inputs from a receiving acoustic transducer and that transmits acoustic signals from a transmitting acoustic transducer . The transceiver is computer based and transmits signals in response to messages input at a terminal and displays messages on that same terminal .

Site has a similar organization with a transceiver that receives signals from a receiving acoustic transducer and transmits signals from a transmitting acoustic transducer . A terminal serves as an input device for messages to be transmitted and a display for received messages.

Incorporating transceivers such as the transceivers and at each of two sites along with separate transmitting and receiving acoustic transducers enables bi directional or full duplex communications. It will be apparent to those of ordinary skill in the art that the system in is also adapted to provide uni directional or half duplex communications.

Each site has the same basic construction so depicts SITE as a representative site in which the transceiver comprises a CPU based modem with a CPU that interfaces with a source of transmitted messages such as the terminal . A transmitter module responds to messages from the terminal by encoding the data for transmission to a digital to analog D A converter . The converter generates an output from the transmitting acoustic transducer in the form of a transmitted radiated signal .

For full duplex operations the receiving acoustic transducer receives signals in an analog form for transfer to an analog to digital A D converter . The A D converter generates signals that are compatible with a receiver module that with the CPU provides decoding and message display at the terminal .

Thus messages generated at the keyboard of terminal such terminal are encoded and transmitted as the signals . Incoming signals are converted and displayed on a display unit with the terminal . The specific handling of the incoming messages at either terminal or is not important to this invention and could take any of several known implementations.

In one embodiment of this invention a data message is encoded into a pair of redundant fixed length data packets such as shown in as PACKET and PACKET . In like reference numerals refer to like portions of the message with a suffix 0 for PACKET and 1 for PACKET . Thus depicts PACKET as packet and PACKET as packet .

Each packet includes a leading synchronizing signal or pulse or that could be a phase shift keyed PSK target identification signal. The duration and form of the synchronizing pulse can be varied and generally will be determined by outside characteristics that form no part of this invention.

Dead time intervals and follow the synchronizing pulses or . Each dead time interval allows any reverberation to dissipate before data is sent.

Next the packet includes a quadrature phase shift key QPSK or like modulated data block that includes a sequence of symbols like characters organized as training symbols and data symbols and and padding symbols and . In one specific embodiment each data packet has 200 training symbols. The balance comprises 1800 symbols with a symbol duration of 400 microseconds and a QPSK modulating signal of 5 kHz. Of these 1800 symbols the padding symbols and provide a full number of data bytes even though the actual message may require fewer symbols.

Now referring to initially the transmitter module also shown in begins to form the data packets by generating the training symbols in step and the data or information symbols including the padding symbols in step . Steps and represent optional convolutional encoding and interleaving processes and . As one example step can be implemented by means of a convolutional encoder with a constraint length of 6 or higher and a coding factor of 2 or higher for providing error correction. Block coding and trellis coded modulated processes are examples of alternatives to the convolutional encoding process. Interleaving step provides a means for combating any burst errors. During interleaving a bit pattern is deterministically scrambled for transmission. If a burst of errors occurs during the transmission of the interleaved packet errors will be distributed across the packet when the receive packet is de interleaved. This increases the likelihood that a convolutional decoder can correct the bits in error.

Once these steps are complete step represents a process by which the CPU in modulates the corresponding bit stream by quadrature pulse shift keyed QPSK modulation. Step provides the initial synchronizing pulses or pulse such as synchronizing signals and . Step appends the dead times represented by pulses and in . Then the modulated bit stream including the training symbols and the data symbols and and padding symbols and are appended. A guard time is then added in step .

Step represents the simultaneous transmission of a continuous wave CW pilot signal at a frequency that is at the edge of the QPSK signal band. As described later a receiver module such as the receiver module in uses this tone to estimate Doppler shift in the received signal.

The transmitted signal from the transmitter module is in digital form. The D A converter in then transmits a corresponding analog signal to the transducer to produce the radiated acoustic signal .

Referring now to the incoming received acoustic signal such as the signal in is converted from its analog form in the A D converter to a digital form compatible with the process of the receiver module process. More specifically the receiver module includes a first band pass filter BPF and a second band pass filter BPF . The BPF filter provides an input to a synchronization pulse detector while the BPF filter provides the input to a data buffer . The received signal is also applied to a Doppler estimator that provides an input to the synchronization pulse detector and to a complex demodulator . The output from the demodulator drives an adaptive decision feedback equalizer in response to various parameters and to a multipath signal from the synchronization pulse detector . In turn the output from the adaptive decision feedback equalizer drives a deinterleaver and a decoder to produce an output from which the data signals such as the signals and are recovered when the transmitted signal incorporates these functions.

In order to properly decode the incoming signal the detection of the synchronizing signal must be generated from the first threshold crossing at the synchronization pulse detector . depicts a synchronization pulse detector constructed as a clipped correlator. In this case the received input y n passes through the BPF1 band pass filter into the correlator . A limit circuit provides gain control and a divider provides an appropriate sampling of the incoming signal.

The incoming signal is then demodulated in the complex demodulator with the sine and cosine functions with a demodulating frequency that is twice the Doppler shifted frequency. This demodulator is represented as two demodulators and that operate at a frequency f. A low pass filter and a divide by 16 circuit process the output from the demodulator . A low pass filter and divide by 16 circuit process the output from the demodulator . The outputs from the circuits and drive summing circuits and that connect to correlators and respectively. Absolute values are then obtained from each correlator in circuits and before being coupled through threshold detectors and .

The threshold circuits and provide a detect signal for the decision feed back equalizer to preserve time diversity pairing of the data packets. Specifically two synchronization pulses are used for data transmission one from each packet. The complex demodulator does not accept a detection flag from the synchronization pulse detector unless both synchronizations are present. The complex demodulator also blocks any further signals if the synchronization detectors do not produce the synchronization pulses at the appropriate repetition rate. This minimizes the potential for missed packet detections and false alarms.

As previously indicated at step in the transmitter module superimposes a CW Doppler tracking signal on the QPSK signal. This tone can be started prior to the initiation of the data stream. In one specific example the CW tone starts one second before the first packet begins transmission and remains on continuously throughout the duration of the transmission. Thus the CPU transmitter module D A converter and transducer transmit as an output signal a modulated signal in a given frequency band and a continuous pilot signal having a frequency closely adjacent the given frequency band.

The Doppler estimator in receives this Doppler tracking tone or pilot signal and constantly samples this tone to estimate the Doppler shift of the incoming QPSK data packet. A narrow band pass filter centered at the frequency of the CW pilot tone samples the data. The bandwidth of the filter is set to pass the tone assuming frequent Doppler shifts in the frequencies shift range of 1 . A decimator processes the output from the bandpass filter and a multi point Fast Fourier Transform FFT is then performed on the decimated data to provide an accurate Doppler estimate. Using a decimating factor of 48 to 56 and a 512 point FFT for example yields a Doppler resolution of less than 0.02 .

As shown in the output of the Doppler estimator is transferred to the synchronization pulse detector and to the complex demodulator . The synchronization pulse detector uses the information to tune the frequency of its space banding routine. When a synchronization detection occurs the receiver buffers the incoming data packet in the data buffer . The first Doppler estimate received after packet detection occurs is assigned to the Doppler estimate of the buffered packet. With the next packet detection the presently buffered data and its estimated Doppler shifted center frequency are passed to the complex demodulator .

The complex demodulator in receives the Doppler shifted center frequency signal from the estimator and decodes the information in the data buffer . is a diagram of this complex demodulator. It shows two input signals. Specifically a signal x n represents the data taken at a nominal sampling rate and a signal fis the Doppler compensated bandwidth frequency. Demodulators and receive these signals.

The advantage of using the Doppler compensated continuous wave tone as a demodulating signal becomes apparent in terms of analyzing a specific signal. Assume that the transmitted signal has a bit duration of 400 microseconds with a nominal bandwidth of 2500 Hz. If the Doppler shift is 0.1 the Doppler shifted signal has a bandwidth of 2502.5 Hz and its duration is 0.999 t. Assume further that both the original signal and the Doppler shifted signal are sampled at a Nyquist rate of 5 kHz so tequal 800 milliseconds. All the power and information in the original analog signal is contained within 4000 samples. However all the information in the Doppler shifted signal is contained in only 3 996 samples. Now it will become apparent that once a signal has been sampled the time axis assigned to the samples is arbitrary. If the clock of the A D converter in were adjusted such that the Doppler shifted signal were sampled at 5 005 Hz there would be 4 000 samples within the time interval t. In the absence of noise these 4 000 samples would be identical to the 4 000 samples form the original signal sampled at 5 KHz.

Referring again to low pass filters and pass the signals from the demodulators and to Doppler compensation circuits and respectively to produce signals Res n and Ims n representing the real and imaginary components of the complex vector signal x n .

This circuitry approximates the previously described methodology but uses a fixed sampling rate. In this case the sampling rate is set to 50 KHz so that the original signal has 40 000 samples. For the above identified Doppler shift the Doppler shifted signal contains only 39 960 samples. If the original signal were then decimated by 10 the resulting sequence would again contain 4 000 samples with two samples per QPSK symbol to create 4 000 samples in the Doppler shifted sample the signal would have to be decimated by 10 d 9.99. The compensators and do not decimate by an integer value. Instead they find the most evenly spaced 4 000 samples within the 39960 samples. No interpolation between samples occurs. For example the fifth entry in the decimated Doppler shifted sequence should have an index in the over sampled sequence of five times 9.999 or 49.95. No such sample exists. The fiftieth sample in the oversampled sequence would be used. For the 57th decimated sample 57 9.99 equals 569.4 so sample would be used. This process assumes that the difference between the closest sample in the oversampled sequence and the actual value at the fractional index is small and that the closest sample is a good approximation of the actual value. However this assumption is only valid when the original fixed sampling rate is much greater than the desired decimated rate. Oversampling by a factor of 10 appears sufficient but obviously other oversampling factors might be used.

A summing junction receives all these input signals along with a feedback signal from a feedback section . A decision rule circuit provides an output signal os symbol sequence that is conveyed to the de interleaver circuit in .

Such an adaptive equalizer forms an effective receiver component because it has the ability to reduce severe time varying intersymbol interference. The feedforward sections use fractional spacing to compensate for any packet synchronization misalignments as well as delay and amplitude distortion. Diversity inputs are included to offset the significant performance degradation that can occur in a single input receiver due to fading. The digital phase locked loop section that includes the feedback section provides adaptive carrier phase recovery and maintains receiver performance in the underwater acoustic environment where rapid phase shifts can introduce errors. The phase shifts are often too rapid to be tracked by only adapting filter coefficients that are required in other circuits. Without implicit phase correction where k is the phase estimate for the rth channel the decision feedback equalizer would fail in most underwater applications.

More specifically the estimate of the received symbol can be written as 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1 2 k 2 k 1 2 k 1 2 k e1. . . 2 k e 1 . . . 3 Adaptive decision feedback equalizers for processing signals in accordance with equations 1 through 3 are well within the skill of a person of ordinary skill in the art. In some applications a standard recursive least squares algorithm adjusts the weight factor W k with input U k to produce minimum mean square error in the symbol estimate Z k . However standard RLS algorithms introduce complexities and make it undesirable for this particular application. Consequently depicts a structure in which fast transversal filter FTF algorithms provide an implementation of the RLS update equations to reduce the computational burden. FTF algorithms offer convergence and tracking performance without the computational load of conventional RLS algorithms.

Referring again to the output signal from the adaptive decision feedback equalizer is a synchronized demodulated signal based upon the received pilot signal and the modulated signal from the received signal. The receiver transfers this equalizer output to a de interleaver circuit that is a first component in the decoding process for generating the received message at the terminal . The de interleaver circuit performs the reverse function performed by the interleaver in . If data is encoded using for example a convolutional code a decoder converts the signal from the de interleaver to a decoded output message. The specific implementation of the decoder will be dependent upon the specific implementation of the encoder .

As will now be apparent a system constructed in accordance with this invention meets several objectives of this invention. Specifically a communications system constructed in accordance with this invention provides an acoustic bi directional undersea communication system. The system overcomes or minimizes many of the problems introduced by multi path effects. As a result the system provides high telemetry rates and provides reliable communications in both deep water and shallow water environments.

This invention has been disclosed in terms of certain embodiments. It will be apparent that many modifications can be made to the disclosed apparatus without departing from the invention. Therefore it is the intent of the appended claims to cover all such variations and modifications as come within the true spirit and scope of this invention.

