---

title: Method by which call centers can vector inbound TTY calls automatically to TTY-enabled resources
abstract: The present invention is directed to a contact processing system that includes:


url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07567653&OS=07567653&RS=07567653
owner: Avaya Inc.
number: 07567653
owner_city: Basking Ridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050322
---
The invention relates generally to contact centers and particularly to identifying and appropriately routing TTY enabled contacts.

To allow for people having speech and or hearing disabilities that prevent them from using conventional telephones to communicate over the public switched telephony network text telephones TTY devices also known as telecommunications devices for the deaf TDD devices have been developed. In general such devices encode characters of text using sequences of audible tones. In particular in response to receiving a command to transmit a character a TTY device will generate a sequence of audible tones that is transmitted through the telephone network to a similar TTY device at the receiving end. The TTY device at the receiving end decodes the sequence of audible tones and displays or otherwise outputs the encoded character.

Text telephone devices operate according to various operating protocols or standards. When a call is placed between countries or regions adhering to different protocols standard TTY devices become inoperable. For example in the United States TTY devices communicate with one another using a 45.45 Baud frequency shift key protocol commonly referred to as Baudot signaling. Baudot signaling transmits characters using a sequence of seven audible tones at either 1400 Hz or 1800 Hz. In particular a Baudot character comprises a start bit of 1800 Hz five tones of either 1400 or 1800 Hz to signal the series of five bits specifying the character and a stop bit of 1400 Hz. There is no error correction. There is no handshake tone nor is there a carrier tone. TTY devices that use this style of encoding are silent when not transmitting. At 45.45 Baud the duration of each individual tone signaling the start tone and the five tones specifying the character is 22 milliseconds. The stop tone is often 33 milliseconds in duration and can be 44 milliseconds.

The standard for TTY devices that is commonly employed in the United Kingdom Ireland Australia and South Africa is identical to the standard used in the United States except that the system is 50 Baud. Accordingly tones that in the U.S. TTY protocol are 22 ms in duration are 20 ms in duration according to the U.K. protocol. This difference is sufficient to prevent devices designed to operate using one of the protocols to interoperate with devices designed to operate using the other protocol.

For a variety of reasons particularly problems caused by packet loss and audio compression it is not practical to use voice or audio channels on packet switched Voice over Internet Protocol or VoIP wide area networks to transmit TTY tones. For this reason various non audio data protocols such as RFC2833 and RFC2793 are being used to convert the TTY tones into equivalent packet payloads for transmission over the Internet.

Because many TTY callers currently do not have the necessary software to make Internet calls most TTY calls are still made over traditional circuit switched networks such as the Public Switched Telecommunications Network or PSTN. This includes traditional TTY calls that may be directed to a resource that is on an IP or VoIP network thereby often necessitating a hybrid architecture in which a gateway device translates between audio TTY tones on the circuit switched network and equivalent non audio data packets on the packet switched network.

Even though the problem of reliable transmission of TTY signals on VoIP networks has been addressed in the prior art a problem that remains is that call centers including 9 1 1 emergency services and 2 1 1 3 1 1 information services presently lack an inexpensive mechanism for identifying incoming PSTN calls that are from TTY users hereinafter referred to as TTY enabled calls . As a result the routing of those calls to an appropriate TTY enabled resource has tended to be inefficient. There are a number of reasons for this deficiency. For example unlike facsimile machines and computer modems which transmit CNG tones TTY s do not emit a self identifying handshake tone or a carrier tone. Even though some call center configurations prompt TTY callers to enter a specified DTMF touch tone command to identify themselves as TTY callers many TTY s including the Avaya Model 8840 are unable to generate DTMF signals after the call is placed. Such TTY s switch automatically to TTY mode after generating the necessary DTMF signals to dial the call. As a result many TTY callers are unable to make menu selections with traditional DTMF input automated attendant and IVR systems.

Because many TTY users are unable to transmit DTMF signals IVR systems that are able to accept TTY format menu selections such as the Avaya Interactive Response platform have been developed. However even with these systems a complicating factor is that the Baudot communications protocol used by TTY s is moded i.e. the same sequence of tones can actually correspond to different characters. Illustratively the five bit sequence 00001 can correspond to the letter E or to the number 3 depending on whether the TTY is in letters mode or numbers mode. Because the protocol itself is half duplex the user of a TTY device who has tried to transmit the letter E has no way of knowing whether the receiving device decoded this transmission as an E or as a 3. To overcome the complications of moded output and make menu selections possible specialized software unnecessary in DTMF only systems is often required to resolve the potential ambiguity of the input. Many call centers use such specialized software to provide automated attendant and IVR systems that can accept TTY format inputs in place of DTMF input. However in call centers in which the only application for the software would be to vector a TTY call to a TTY equipped agent the use of such TTY decoding software represents a very expensive solution.

As a consequence most call centers that desire to be directly accessible to TTY users provide a separate phone number for TTY callers. Unfortunately provision of separate voice and TTY inbound telephone numbers represents an additional expense for these call centers especially if both of the inbound lines are toll free. Although this practice is currently used by many private call centers it is now barred by the U.S. Department of Justice for 9 1 1 services chiefly because in a typical installation it would not be possible to provide a separate easy to remember three digit number for the TTY users. The configuration recommended by the U.S. Department of Justice for 9 1 1 call centers is to equip all agents with TTY devices an approach that adds significantly to the equipment costs for 9 1 1 centers.

These and other needs are addressed by the various embodiments and configurations of the present invention. The present invention is directed generally to a method and apparatus that determines whether an incoming contact which is commonly circuit switched is TTY enabled. As used herein TTY enabled refers to a device configured to receive and or transmit TTY signals. Examples of TTY enabled devices include analog or digital telephones engaged with a TTY device IVR s configured to send and or receive TTY signals messaging systems that are able to prompt in TTY format and accept TTY format messages and the like.

In one embodiment the present invention is directed to a contact processing method that includes the steps 

 d when a TTY response has been received within the selected time routing the contact to a TTY enabled contact center resource e.g. a TTY equipped agent and a TTY compatible IVR system and

 e when no TTY response has been received within the selected time processing the contact as a non TTY enabled contact. Steps b and c are performed before the contact is routed to a contact center resource. A contact that is TTY enabled can be identified regardless of the precise text content of the received TTY response. Put simply the fact that a TTY response is received tells the contact center that the contact is TTY enabled. Typically the transmitted TTY character set includes a plurality of characters to avoid a TTY user from wrongly concluding from a single TTY character that talk off has occurred.

In one configuration the transmitted TTY character s is the initial set of signals transmitted by the contact center to the contactor. This prevents the TTY contactor from erroneously concluding that he or she has dialed or otherwise been connected with the wrong number.

In one configuration the operation of an encoder decoder in the contact center is monitored to determine whether a set of received signals is from a TTY device. This may be effected by detecting the activation or deactivation of the encoder decoder and or analyzing the packet header and or packet payload associated with the set of received signals.

In one configuration the contact center determines a geographic proximity of the contactor based on the characteristics of the tones in the TTY response. As noted previously TTY signals have differing requirements in differing countries.

The present invention can have a number of advantages over the prior art. For example the present invention can be considerably more convenient because it permits TTY users to use the same phone number that everyone else uses for the same services e.g. 2 1 1 . The present invention generally does not require TTY users to generate DTMF signals to be vectored properly. The present invention can be considerably less expensive than other approaches particularly the approach of equipping every agent with a TTY device and training them to interact with TTY users and implemented with little effort on platforms that already support TTY on VoIP. Current media servers currently look on analog and digital ports for acoustic tones and encode the signals in data packets according to an existing protocol such as RFC2793 or RFC2833. A sniffer or similar device can simply monitor these operations to identify TTY enabled contacts. The introductory TTY signal transmitted to each contactor to determine whether the contactor is TTY enabled can be configured to be unobtrusive to non TTY enabled contactors.

The above described embodiments and configurations are neither complete nor exhaustive. As will be appreciated other embodiments of the invention are possible utilizing alone or in combination one or more of the features set forth above or described in detail below.

With reference now to a communication system in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention is depicted. The communication system generally includes a user associated with a teletype TTY device and a communication device a contact center and an intervening communications network .

The communication device may be interconnected to the communication network directly as shown or through a media server not shown . The TTY device is conventional. As can be appreciated by one of skill in the art the TTY device typically includes a keyboard for entering selected characters for transmission and a display for displaying received characters. Likewise the communication device is conventional such as a standard analog or digital telephone. As can be appreciated by one of skill in the art the TTY device and communication device may also be integral to one another rather than being implemented as separate components. In addition a TTY device may comprise an interactive voice response system.

The communication network may be circuit switched and or packet switched with a circuit switched network such as the Public Switched Telecommunications Network being typical.

The contact center includes a gateway to act as a signal repeater and protocol converter a TTY enabled Interactive Voice Response or IVR to provide automated contact servicing a media server to effect vectoring or routing of incoming contacts agent TTY equipped communication devices to permit agents to service with the TTY type or TTY enabled contacts and agent non TTY equipped communication devices to permit agents to service regular non TTY type contacts all interconnected by a packet switched Local Area Network or LAN . The TTY enabled IVR and agent TTY equipped and agent non TTY equipped communication devices and respectively are conventional. In particular the agent TTY equipped communication devices can be equipped similarly to the TTY device and associated communication device .

The gateway is depicted in . The gateway includes an encoder decoder to receive circuit switched TTY tones and convert them into corresponding digital representations a packetizer to packetize the digital representations into a collection of packets for transmission over the LAN and a packet payload type identifier to monitor the operational state of the encoder decoder e.g. whether the encoder decoder is active or inactive and or encoder decoder and or packetizer output and determine whether the incoming contact is TTY enabled. As will be appreciated the output of the encoder decoder and certain packet header information is determined by the particular TTY protocol employed. Under protocols such as T.140 and RFC2793 a text equivalent of the received set of TTY tones is generated and packetized. With the RFC2833 based approach that has been implemented by Avaya descriptions of the received TTY tones are generated and packetized. The encoder decoder and packetizer are conventional.

The media server interconnects analog IP telephone and or digital communications devices to the wider communication network . The media server can be any converged architecture for directing circuit switched and or packet switched customer contacts to one or more communication devices. Typically the server is a stored program controlled system that conventionally includes interfaces to external communication links a communications switching fabric service circuits e.g. tone detectors and generators etc. memory for storing control programs and data and a processor i.e. a computer for executing the stored control programs to control the interfaces and the fabric and to provide automatic contact distribution functionality. Features provided by the media server typically include not only telephony features and intelligent contact routing but also localization collaboration mobility messaging system management attendant features networking and application programming interfaces. Illustratively the media server is a modified form of Avaya Inc. s Definity Private Branch Exchange PBX based ACD system Avaya Inc. s IP600 LAN based ACD system or an S8100 S8300 S8500 S8700 or S8710 media server running a modified version of Avaya Inc. s Communication Manager voice application software with call processing capabilities and contact center functions. Other types of known switches and servers are well known in the art and therefore not described in detail herein.

One possible configuration of the media server is depicted in . The server is in communication with a plurality of customer communication lines which are typically part of the network and or can be one or more packet switched links and agent communication line which can be a voice and data transmission line such as LAN and or a circuit switched voice line . The server can include Avaya Inc. s Operational Analyst or OA with On Line Analytical Processing or OLAP technology Basic Call Management System or BCMS or another type of Call Management System or CMS that gathers contact records and contact center statistics for use in generating contact center reports. OA BCMS and CMS will hereinafter be referred to individually or collectively as CMS .

Included among the data stored in the server is a set of logical work item queues a separate set of physical agent queues an agent and contact selector a contact vector and a TTY contact identifier . As will be appreciated the agent or contact selector assigns incoming contacts or work items to a corresponding work item queue based upon contact characteristics and agents to one or more corresponding agent queues based upon the skills that they possess. For example TTY enabled contacts are assigned to a work item queue that is served by an agent queue comprising TTY trained and equipped agents. Each logical work item queue corresponds to a different set of agent skills as does each agent queue . Conventionally work items are prioritized and either are enqueued in individual ones of the logical work item queues in their order of priority or are enqueued in different ones of a plurality of logical work item queues that correspond to a different priority.

The work item or contact vector assigns work items to different work item queues based upon a number of predetermined criteria including customer identity customer needs such as TTY interaction contact center needs current work item center queue lengths customer value and the agent skill that is required for the proper handling of the contact.

Call vectoring one type of work item routing which may be used by the contact vector is a process of defining vector programs that determine how a specific call should be routed and what call treatment that call is to be given. Call vectoring includes three basic components namely Vector Directory Numbers VDNs vectors and vector commands. When a contact arrives the contact is first directed to a VDN. A VDN is an internal telephone number that in turn directs the call to the specific vector. The vector is a set of commands that define the processing of a contact. The VDN represents the call type or category or the service desired by the contactor such as billing customer service sales and the like. In the present invention a number of parameters determine an appropriate VDN to which a contact is directed including Directory Number Information Service or DNIS digits ANI II digits and or whether the contact is TTY enabled.

When each and every contact arrives at the gateway regardless of whether or not the contact is TTY enabled the TTY contact identifier while the contact is held or located at the gateway effects transmission of one or more TTY characters to the contactor seeking to elicit a TTY response. The TTY transmission is typically the first or initial set of signals provided to the contactor e.g. provided before any audio response such as music on hold or automated greeting is provided to the contactor. This prevents the TTY user from hanging up in the mistaken belief that he or she has dialed the wrong number and provides more time in which to receive and process a TTY response. As will be appreciated TTY devices provide feedback to the TTY user as to the type of signals being received e.g. TTY tone ring voice etc. . The TTY characters transmitted can convey any desired message so long as the message will have a high likelihood of persuading the contactor to provide a TTY response if the contact is TTY enabled. For example the message can be TTY Hello Hi GA a standard TTY abbreviation for Go Ahead and the like. Preferably the number of TTY tones transmitted is not enough to dissuade or otherwise annoy non TTY enabled contactors. Keeping in mind that a six character TTY transmission will be approximately one second long the short TTY transmissions described previously will sound to a non TTY caller like a parakeet chirp or an additional ring and will not lead the voice based contactor to believe that the contact has been lost has a poor connection or has been misdirected to a facsimile machine. When a TTY response is received from the caller regardless of what the TTY message conveys the packet payload type identifier monitors the encoder decoder and notifies the TTY contact identifier that the inbound contact is TTY enabled and the TTY contact identifier requests that the agent and contact selector vector the contact to a work item queue serviced by an agent queue containing TTY trained agents using agent TTY equipped communication devices .

The operation of the packet payload type identifier and TTY contact identifier will now be described with reference to .

With reference to an incoming contact is received by the gateway and a notification is forwarded to the media server . In decision diamond the media server determines that the incoming contact has arrived and is waiting for routing.

In step the media server instructs the gateway to generate the TTY tones associated with a predetermined set of TTY characters and forward the generated TTY tones to the user . At this juncture the TTY contact identifier has not determined whether or not the user is TTY enabled because the signaling from the communication device has been by DTMF and not TTY tones. To avoid distracting non TTY enabled contactors the number of TTY characters in the set is typically fewer than five characters i.e. a sequences of tones lasting for 825 milliseconds or less .

In step the incoming contact is held or parked at the gateway or maintained in a hunt group until a TTY response is received from the user or the passage of a predetermined time whichever occurs first. While the media server is awaiting a TTY response a prerecorded greeting or music may be played to prevent non TTY enabled callers from hanging up.

In decision diamond the identifier determines whether a TTY response has been received. If not the identifier in decision diamond determines whether or not a predetermined time has elapsed since the TTY character set was transmitted. If not the identifier returns to and repeats decision diamond . If so the media server in step processes the contact as a normal non TTY enabled contact and routes the contact to a queue or immediately to an agent non TTY equipped communication device for servicing.

In decision diamond the packet payload type identifier determines whether or not an incoming contact is from a TTY. This is done by monitoring for each incoming set of signals the operation of the encoder decoder . As will be appreciated the encoder decoder generates audio and non audio packets as it decodes and then re encodes the audio signals that it receives from the communications network . In one configuration the packet payload type identifier can assume that TTY signals have been received when the encoder decoder becomes active. As will be appreciated the encoder decoder is present specifically to transmit TTY tones via non voice or non audio channels. In another configuration the packet payload type identifier alternatively or additionally evaluates the non audio output of the encoder decoder and or packetizer to determine whether or not the received signals are from a TTY. As noted when circuit switched TTY signals are received they may be converted by the encoder decoder into a description of the individual tones and or into text equivalent to the characters represented by the TTY tones. The type identifier looks for the type of data packets that would be expected to occur when the incoming audio signal includes TTY tones. For example where RFC2833 is the protocol applied by the encoder decoder the type identifier looks for RFC2833 packets that describe acoustic tones of 22 ms duration at either 1400 or 1800 Hz U.S. standard . Where RFC2793 is the protocol applied by the encoder decoder the type identifier looks for RFC2793 packets that comprise text equivalents to TTY tones. For additional accuracy the identifier may wait until a plurality of packets representing a plurality of TTY tones has been generated before concluding that the contact is TTY enabled. In yet another configuration the packet payload type identifier examines the header of the packet to identify protocol descriptors indicating that the payload is to processed in accordance with a TTY protocol such as RFC2793 or RFC2833. In yet another configuration the encoder decoder is configured to notify the packet payload type identifier and or TTY contact identifier directly when a set of TTY tones is received.

When the incoming set of signals is not from a TTY the type identifier does nothing and returns to and repeats decision diamond when a next set of signals is received.

When the incoming set of signals is from a TTY the type identifier in decision diamond determines whether the signals are part of an existing or already routed contact. If so the type identifier does nothing and returns to and repeats decision diamond when a next set of signals is received. If not the type identifier proceeds to step . In an alternative configuration the type identifier notifies the contact identifier as each and every set of TTY signals is received. The contact identifier then determines for each set of TTY signals whether or not the set of TTY signals is part of an existing already routed contact.

In step the type identifier forwards the contact related information to the TTY contact identifier and thereafter returns to and repeats decision diamond when a next set of signals is received. The contact related information can include a unique contact identifier e.g. electronic address or telephone number of the communication device a timestamp associated with the contact an identifier assigned by the media server an identifier of a contact center destination to which the contact has already been routed and the like and a TTY notification flag that is set or unset when a set of TTY signals is received by the gateway .

Returning again to the contact identifier when a TTY response is received transmits a normal TTY greeting or other instructional set of characters to the user . The instructional set of characters can include for example SK for Stop Keying. 

In step the contact identifier notifies the agent and contact selector that the incoming contact is TTY enabled. Based on this notification and other traditional routing parameters the selector routes the incoming contact to a queue and or an agent TTY equipped communication device .

A number of variations and modifications of the invention can be used. It would be possible to provide for some features of the invention without providing others.

For example in one alternative embodiment the TTY contact identifier and or packet payload type identifier is implemented as software hardware a logic circuit such as an Application Specific Integrated Circuit or ASIC or a combination thereof.

In another alternative embodiment the packet payload type identifier can determine the country region of origin of the TTY caller based on the tone parameters or characteristics. For example when the received TTY tones have a specified duration of 22 ms the TTY tones are indicative of a U.S. format TTY while tone durations of 20 ms are indicative of a UK format TTY. The country region of the TTY caller may be taken into account during call vectoring. In this configuration multiple sets of TTY tones of differing durations may be transmitted at different times by the gateway before the contact is routed to determine which set of TTY tones to which the user responds. This information would then be provided to the media server as additional routing information.

The present invention in various embodiments includes components methods processes systems and or apparatus substantially as depicted and described herein including various embodiments subcombinations and subsets thereof. Those of skill in the art will understand how to make and use the present invention after understanding the present disclosure. The present invention in various embodiments includes providing devices and processes in the absence of items not depicted and or described herein or in various embodiments hereof including in the absence of such items as may have been used in previous devices or processes e.g. for improving performance achieving ease and or reducing cost of implementation.

The foregoing discussion of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. The foregoing is not intended to limit the invention to the form or forms disclosed herein. In the foregoing Detailed Description for example various features of the invention are grouped together in one or more embodiments for the purpose of streamlining the disclosure. This method of disclosure is not to be interpreted as reflecting an intention that the claimed invention requires more features than are expressly recited in each claim. Rather as the following claims reflect inventive aspects lie in less than all features of a single foregoing disclosed embodiment. Thus the following claims are hereby incorporated into this Detailed Description with each claim standing on its own as a separate preferred embodiment of the invention.

Moreover though the description of the invention has included description of one or more embodiments and certain variations and modifications other variations and modifications are within the scope of the invention e.g. as may be within the skill and knowledge of those in the art after understanding the present disclosure. It is intended to obtain rights which include alternative embodiments to the extent permitted including alternate interchangeable and or equivalent structures functions ranges or steps to those claimed whether or not such alternate interchangeable and or equivalent structures functions ranges or steps are disclosed herein and without intending to publicly dedicate any patentable subject matter.

