---

title: Technique for coupling meteorology to acoustics in forests
abstract: A system and method of predicting multi-dimensional meteorological and acoustic effects within and above a forest environment comprises collecting input data comprising meteorological and forest canopy characterization data for a specified forest environment; inputting the input data into program meteorology modules comprising an embedded radiative transfer and energy budget methodology module adapted to predict a heat source within and above the forest environment for any location at any time; calculating an incoming total radiation at a top of the forest environment; outputting multi-dimensional acoustics and meteorology numerical codes based on the program meteorology modules and the calculated total radiation; and formulating sound speeds within and above the forest environment based on the numerical codes.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07634393&OS=07634393&RS=07634393
owner: United States of America
number: 07634393
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051229
---
This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 641 298 filed Jan. 4 2005 the complete disclosure of which in its entirety is herein incorporated by reference.

The embodiments described herein may be manufactured used and or licensed by or for the United States Government without the payment of royalties thereon.

A portion of the disclosure of this patent document as provided in the Appendix herein includes material that is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of this patent document or the patent disclosure as it appears in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office patent file or records but otherwise reserves all copyright rights whatsoever.

The embodiments herein generally relate to numerical methods and more particularly to numerical methods for forest meteorology and acoustic computations and applications.

Acoustic sensors are emerging as a key technology for providing battlefield situational awareness necessary to protect ground combat troops. Advantages of acoustic sensors include low cost compactness passive operation low power consumption and non line of sight capability. Many new systems use acoustical arrays to detect classify estimate bearing and cue narrow field of view FOV optics. Some new systems use multiple networked arrays to track targets by bearing estimation and triangulation. At the same time acoustic sensor performance is strongly affected by the atmospheric environment. It is anticipated therefore that improved physics based theory and computer models for meteorology coupled to acoustics in and around forests will contribute important information on the performance of advanced combat sensors systems and communications as well as the effectiveness of battlefield computer aids to increase situational awareness.

Some of the conventional techniques related to numerical models for forest meteorology include exponential or extinction profile models which are formulated to predict one dimensional 1D wind speeds primarily in the mid to upper portion of the forest canopy. Unfortunately these exponential or extinction profile models tend to be difficult to combine to observed or estimated wind speeds above the treetops or below the layer of leaves and branches. In addition extinction profile models are typically not formulated to predict temperatures within and above forests which are needed to compute sound speed.

Prior art related to the development of numerical model codes for forest meteorology were generally formulated to predict one dimensional wind speeds and turbulence within and above uniform forest canopies. In these models radiation and energy budget algorithms were not included to predict the heat source temperatures and sound speed . In contrast the three dimensional Large Eddy Simulation LES model described by Albertson et al. Relative Importance of Local and Regional Controls on Coupled Water 2001 did consider energy budget effects however this as well as other LES models are quite computationally intensive and are not within a computational framework that is most efficient for a rapid and reliable prediction of acoustic propagation in forest environments. In one further case the prior art as described by Meyers and Paw U Modeling the Plant Canopy Micrometeorology with Higher Order Closure Principles Agric. For. Meteorol. Agric. For Meteorol. 41 143 63 1987 and Pyles et al. The UCD Advanced Canopy Atmosphere soil Algorithm 

Prior art related to ray path model codes for acoustic propagation and transmission loss generally assume homogeneous sound and wind speed fields e.g. Moler CB and Solomon LP Use of splines and numerical integration in geometrical acoustics. J Acoust Soc Am 48 739 744 1970 Hallberg B Larsson C and Israelsson S Numerical ray tracing in the atmospheric surface layer J Acoust Soc Am 83 2059 2068 1988 Huisman W H T Sound propagation over vegetation covered ground Dissertation Univ. Nijmegen The Netherlands 176 pp. ISBN 90 9003624 5 1990 Huisman W H T and Attenborough K Reverberation and attenuation in a pine forest J Acoust Soc Am 90 2664 2677 1991 and Salomons E M Computational atmospheric acoustics Kluwer Academic Publishers Dordrecht 335 pp 2001 . The advantage of the invention described herein is that the acoustic models are based on the principles and theory for geometrical acoustics for an inhomogeneous moving medium. Ray paths are thus computed as a function of range dependent wind and sound speed fields. These data are provided independently from 1D and 2D physics based meteorological model for forests Tunick A 2003a Calculating the micrometeorological influences on the speed of sound through the atmosphere in forests J Acoust Soc Am 114 1796 1806 Tunick A. 2003b A two dimensional meteorological computer model for the forest canopy. ARL MR 569 US Army Research Laboratory 2800 Powder Mill Rd Adelphi Md. 20783 1197 2003 Tunick A. 2004a Toward improving the efficiency and realism of coupled meteorological acoustic computer models for the forest canopy. ARL MR 586 April U.S. Army Research Laboratory 2004 . In addition acoustic intensity due to geometrical divergence i.e. energy loss due to spherical spreading is computed as an inverse function of range and the height difference between two adjacent rays. At the same time acoustic intensity gain or loss due to frequency dependent ground effects are included in the model calculation. Note that while the acoustic numerical models embedded in this invention are much simpler than parabolic equation or fast field acoustic programs West et al. 1991 1992 Noble J M 2003 User s manual for the Microsoft window edition of the scanning fast field program SCAFFIP version 3.0. ARL TR 2696 US Army Research Laboratory 2800 Powder Mill Rd Adelphi Md. 20783 1197. Available from the DTIC at http stinet.dtic.mil str ray path models have nevertheless been shown to be a practical and useful tool for analyzing and interpreting refraction effects on sound waves.

Other conventional models include first order closure physics based models which are formulated to predict two dimensional 2D wind speeds and turbulence within and above forest canopies. Here radiation and energy budget methodologies are generally not included to predict the heat source temperatures and sound speed . Additionally second order closure physics based models have been developed to predict one dimensional 1D wind speeds and turbulence within and above forest canopies. Again radiation and energy budget methodologies are not included to predict the heat source temperatures and sound speed . Furthermore higher order closure physics based models such as three dimensional 3D Large Eddy Simulation LES models have been formulated to predict 3D wind speeds temperatures humidity and turbulence within and above forest canopies. Here radiation and energy budget algorithms are sometimes incorporated to predict the heat and moisture sources. However these models tend to be quite computationally intensive especially with regard to turbulence and advection scheme methodologies. Also they can offer much more information related to soil and plant physics than is necessary for the rapid and reliable prediction of sound speed in and around forest canopies.

Conventional techniques related to ray path model codes for acoustic propagation and transmission loss generally assume homogeneous sound and wind speed fields. However forest stands are typically inhomogeneous containing non uniform distributions of canopy height and leaf area density. In addition open fields roadways and buildings often border forests. Generally the conventional techniques primarily show the development of forest canopy wind flow and turbulence models only. However there remains a need for a forest meteorology and acoustic computation technique that takes into account horizontally non uniform sound speed information.

Furthermore an advantage of this invention over the prior art is that it combines the inventors existing numerical models developed in accordance with the invention and those still in development into a comprehensive process which includes input memory and computing devices numerical codes and graphics display. The invention necessarily addresses both the thermodynamic and mechanical influences on sound speed within and above forest canopies. Numerical models are executed in a computationally efficient framework. Hence the invention is a novel process to obtain rapid and reliable predictions of useful acoustic and meteorological information which can be applied to the study of meteorological aspects of acoustic propagation within and above forests.

In view of the foregoing the embodiments herein provide a method of predicting multi dimensional meteorological and acoustic effects within and above a forest environment and a program storage device readable by computer tangibly embodying a program of instructions executable by the computer to perform a method of predicting multi dimensional meteorological and acoustic effects within and above a forest environment wherein the method comprises collecting input data comprising meteorological and forest canopy characterization data for a specified forest environment inputting the input data into program meteorology modules comprising an embedded radiative transfer and energy budget methodology module adapted to predict a heat source within and above the forest environment for any location at any time calculating an incoming total radiation at a top of the forest environment outputting multi dimensional acoustics and meteorology numerical codes based on the program meteorology modules and the calculated total radiation and formulating sound speeds within and above the forest environment based on the numerical codes. Preferably the input data further comprises site location data cloud cover data wind speed data temperature data humidity data time of day data day of year characteristics data and environment characterization data for the forest environment.

Additionally the environment characterization data preferably comprises tree height data leaf area density data and drag coefficient data affecting the forest environment. Moreover the embedded radiative transfer and energy budget methodology preferably predicts a heat source within and above the forest environment. Preferably the calculating of the incoming total radiation at the top of the forest environment allows for calculations of a transmission reflection absorption and emission of a solar flux within the forest environment. Also the program meteorology modules may comprise acoustic transmission loss modules acoustic ray path modules one dimensional meteorological modules for the forest environments and two dimensional meteorological modules for forest environments. Preferably the two dimensional meteorological modules for the forest environments comprises variable grid modules and wherein the method further comprises applying the variable grid modules to the acoustic transmission loss modules and the acoustic ray path modules.

The invention described herein is a method that inputs readily available meteorological and forest characterization data to a computer. On the computer reside numerical model codes for acoustics and meteorology within and above forests. The embodiments for meteorology are steady state second order turbulence closure models with an embedded radiative transfer and energy budget algorithm to predict the heat source for any location at any time of day. Formulations co developed by the inventors are used to calculate the incoming total radiation at the canopy top which is necessary in order to calculate the transmission reflection absorption and emission of the solar flux through the forest. The computer then executes meteorological and acoustics numerical models and provides as output to a graphics display device a rapid and reliable prediction of sound speed and transmission loss information in uniform and complex wooded areas. presents a schematic of the process.

A key element in determining point to point acoustic transmission in forests is modeling the variation with height above ground of the wind and sound speed. Sound speed is readily derived from estimates of air temperature and relative humidity albeit variations in sound speed caused by changes in relative humidity are comparatively small . The invention discussed herein is a method that uses meteorological and acoustics numerical models embedded into a computing device to predict and graphically display rapid and reliable meteorology and acoustic transmission loss information within and above forest canopies. This process can be important in assessing the performance of advanced acoustic sensors and communications as well as determining the effectiveness of battlefield computer aids to increase situational awareness. Potential uses include studying the effects of forest meteorology on sound blast propagation for noise abatement studies at military training sites. The invention may also be utilized by the EPA in noise abatement studies i.e. investigating the effectiveness of forests to reduce traffic and or airport noise and the like.

Another embodiment provides a system of predicting multi dimensional meteorological and acoustic effects within and above a forest environment wherein the system comprises a computer memory device comprising input data corresponding to meteorological and forest canopy characterization data for a specified forest environment a processor operatively connected to the computer memory device wherein the processor is adapted to input the input data into program meteorology modules comprising an embedded radiative transfer and energy budget methodology module to predict a heat source within and above the forest environment for any location at any time a calculating device operatively connected to the processor wherein the calculating device is adapted to calculate an incoming total radiation at a top of the forest environment a computing device operatively connected to the calculating device wherein the computing device is adapted to output multi dimensional acoustics and meteorology numerical codes based on the program meteorology modules and the calculated total radiation and formulate sound speeds within and above the forest environment based on the numerical codes and a graphic user interface operatively connected to the computing device wherein the graphic user interface is adapted to display the acoustic speeds within and above the forest environment. Preferably the input data further comprises site location data cloud cover data wind speed data temperature data humidity data time of day data day of year characteristics data and environment characterization data for the forest environment.

Additionally the environment characterization data preferably comprises tree height data leaf area density data and drag coefficient data affecting the forest environment. Moreover the embedded radiative transfer and energy budget methodology module is preferably adapted to predict a heat source within and above the forest environment. Furthermore the calculating device is preferably adapted to calculate a transmission reflection absorption and emission of a solar flux within the forest environment. Also the program meteorology modules may comprise acoustic transmission loss modules acoustic ray path modules one dimensional meteorological modules for forest environments and two dimensional meteorological modules for forest environments. Preferably the two dimensional meteorological modules for the forest environment comprises variable grid modules and wherein the program meteorology modules further comprise program modules adapted to apply the variable grid modules to the acoustic transmission loss modules and the acoustic ray path modules.

These and other aspects of the embodiments herein will be better appreciated and understood when considered in conjunction with the following description and the accompanying drawings. It should be understood however that the following descriptions while indicating preferred embodiments and numerous specific details thereof are given by way of illustration and not of limitation. Many changes and modifications may be made within the scope of the embodiments herein without departing from the spirit thereof and the embodiments herein include all such modifications.

The embodiments herein and the various features and advantageous details thereof are explained more fully with reference to the non limiting embodiments that are illustrated in the accompanying drawings and detailed in the following description. Descriptions of well known components and processing techniques are omitted so as to not unnecessarily obscure the embodiments herein. The examples used herein are intended merely to facilitate an understanding of ways in which the embodiments herein may be practiced and to further enable those of skill in the art to practice the embodiments herein. Accordingly the examples should not be construed as limiting the scope of the embodiments herein.

In a previous study Tunick 2003a it was found that a useful mathematical representation of the wind flow temperatures and turbulence inside and above a uniform continuous forest stand could be obtained by means of a one dimensional 1 D steady state second order turbulence closure model with an embedded radiative transfer and energy budget algorithm to predict the heat source. Development of this 1 D model made it possible to generate realistic profiles for the winds and sound speed inside and above a forest canopy. As a result it was shown that acoustic transmission loss and ducting of acoustic waves in and around forests is significantly influenced by local meteorological profile structure.

However forest stands are typically inhomogeneous containing non uniform distributions of canopy height and leaf area density e.g. Albertson et al. 2001 . In addition open fields roadways and buildings often border forests. Hence to begin to address non uniform forests and forest edges Tunick 2003b expanded the earlier 1 D equation set and developed a new model to calculate calculate the 2 D steady state canopy wind flow temperatures turbulent variances Reynolds stress and heat flux. In the 2 D model a set of simultaneous second order ordinary differential equations for each of eleven computed variables is solved iteratively using the Thomas algorithm a tri diagonal matrix solver Press et al. 1992 . The computed variables now include the mean flow vertical w. Additionally kinematic fluctuation pressure p is determined by taking the divergence of the mean flow equations which after some rearranging and cancellation of terms due to continuity yields Poisson s equation for pressure velocity coupling Ferziger and Peri 2002 . Vertical derivatives are solved by central differencing and horizontal derivatives are solved by upwind differencing. Finally Newton Cotes formulas for numerical integration are applied to derive wind flow streamlines.

As mentioned there remains a need for a forest meteorology and acoustic computation technique that takes into account horizontally non uniform sound speed information. The embodiments herein achieve this by providing a physics based computerized technique to calculate one and two dimensional forest canopy meteorology and turbulence for acoustic application research that considers both the mechanical and thermodynamic influences on the speed of sound in a forest environment which can be applied in stable unstable and neutral atmospheric conditions. Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to where similar reference characters denote corresponding features consistently throughout the figures there are shown preferred embodiments.

An important element in determining point to point acoustic transmission in forests is modeling the variation with height above ground of the winds and sound speed. Sound speed is readily derived from estimates of air temperature and relative humidity albeit variations in sound speed caused by changes in relative humidity are comparatively small . A preferred embodiment herein provides a method that uses meteorological and acoustics numerical models embedded into a computing device to predict and graphically display rapid meteorology and acoustic transmission loss information within and above forest canopies.

Moreover the embodiments herein provide a methodology to predict one dimensional 1D and two dimensional 2D wind speeds temperatures and turbulence within and above forest canopies. Accordingly radiation and energy budget methodologies are incorporated to predict the heat source. In most cases to include some LES formulations a relatively simple extinction profile for the heat source is assumed. illustrates a methodology according to an embodiment herein where in step data is provided for input i.e. meteorological data cloud cover site location time of day and day of year characteristics and canopy characterization data e.g. tree height leaf area density information and drag coefficient. The input data is stored in a memory device in step . Here the stored input data is transferred from the memory device to a computer on which numerical model codes for acoustics and meteorology reside. The models for meteorology are steady state second order turbulence closure models with an embedded radiative transfer and energy budget algorithm to predict the heat source for any location at any time i.e. any time of the day or night . Formulations are used to calculate the incoming total radiation at the canopy top which is necessary in order to calculate the transmission reflection absorption and emission of the solar flux through the forest. Next in step a computing device executes numerical model codes for acoustics and meteorology and provides model output to a memory device. In steps and numerical model output data is stored in memory and made available for analysis and graphics display. Thereafter in step acoustic and meteorological model output is transferred to a graphics device for display analysis and interpretation of a rapid and reliable prediction of sound speed and transmission loss information in uniform and complex wooded areas.

Useful mathematical representations of the wind flow temperatures and turbulence inside and above a uniform continuous forest stand can be obtained by means of a 1D steady state second order turbulence closure model with an embedded radiative transfer and energy budget methodology to predict the heat source. Development of this 1D model makes it possible to generate realistic profiles for the winds and sound speed inside and above a forest canopy. As a result it is known that the acoustic transmission loss and ducting of acoustic waves in and around forests is significantly influenced by a local meteorological profile structure.

The 1D model includes the steady state and horizontally homogeneous conservation simplified Navier Stokes equations for the turbulent fluxes and mean variances of the winds inside and above the forest canopy. The parameterized model equations for the mean flow stress longitudinal lateral and vertical velocity variances respectively are as follows 

Here z is the vertical coordinate C 0.15 is the forest canopy drag coefficient A in units mm is the leaf area density q square root over in units ms is the turbulent kinetic energy of the mean flow C is a constant whose value is approximately 0.077 g is acceleration due to gravity is the ambient air potential temperature in units K is the horizontal heat flux is the vertical heat flux and and are length scales i.e. al where k is an arbitrary index and l is the mixing length. Values for these closure constants are as follows a 0.39 a 0.85 and a 16.57. The overbars indicate a time averaged mean whereas the brackets indicate horizontal averaging. The lateral velocity variance is calculated in the current 1D model to support the turbulent kinetic energy closure approximations for the triple product and dissipation terms.

Four additional conservation equations to the 1D model code are provided below. They are the equations for the mean temperature vertical heat flux horizontal heat flux and temperature variance which can be written as follows 

The heat source term S is modeled as 2 10 Here A in units mm is the leaf area density is the mean leaf surface to ambient air temperature difference and ris the aerodynamic resistance to heat transfer. A 1D radiative transfer and energy budget methodology is incorporated into the model calculation to make it possible to determine the heat source S for any time i.e. any time of the day or night . First the formulations to calculate the incoming total radiation at the canopy top as a function of cloud cover latitude longitude day of year and time of day are used as inputs i.e. these inputs are used to determine the solar declination hour and zenith angles Table 1 . Thus the total downward short wave radiation at canopy top is R ITTTTcos 11 where

Then the four spectral components for short wave radiation direct beam and diffuse visible direct beam and diffuse near infrared radiation as a function of the total downward short wave flux at canopy top are calculated because extinction and reflection through the forest canopy are different for each. The remainder of the radiative transfer subroutine for the forest canopy i.e. the transmission reflection absorption and emission of the solar flux necessary to compute leaf surface to ambient air temperature differences is outlined.

The transmission of sound waves in forests involves three main phenomena 1 interference between direct and ground reflected acoustic waves 2 scattering by tree trunks and branches the ground and turbulence and 3 absorption by the trees leaves branches the ground and the air. Therefore one might expect estimates of relative sound pressure level in part to depend on the strength and locations of wind speed and sound speed profile inversions between the ground and the model top i.e. z 3h where h is the height of the canopy .

Forest canopy characterization plays an important role in defining the momentum and heat flux divergence through the forest layer. Different tree types can significantly affect the wind temperature and sound speed fields. As an example leaf area density profiles for an oak hickory and loblolly pine are shown in . Alternately forest canopies may conform to one of three general leaf area distribution profiles as shown in . Moreover leaf area distributions may not always be symmetric about the layer of maximum foliage density such as profile but may be more often skewed upward toward the top of the forest canopy. By definition the leaf area index

Model input parameters related to canopy characteristics are presented in Table 2. The canopy height and the drag coefficient primarily influence the estimates of wind speed. The average leaf size diameter is incorporated in the energy budget calculation of leaf surface to ambient air temperature differences. The total LAI and tree type which determines the leaf area density profile influence both the temperature and wind speed profile estimates. Both the 1D and 2D model calculations assume a relatively closed continuous canopy.

Finally the 1D model input parameters related to meteorological characteristics are presented in Table 3. This data shows that the 1D model is viable for many practical cases. Example 1D model output profiles are shown in . Example 2D model output profiles are shown in . In the units for the profiles of the horizontal wind velocity is in units ms in the profile illustrates dimensionless wind flow streamlines in the units for the profiles of the vertical wind velocity is in units ms and in the units for the profiles of the fluctuation pressure is in units ms.

The development of the 1D model makes it possible to generate realistic profiles for the winds and sound speed inside and above a forest canopy. As a result it is established that acoustic transmission loss and ducting of acoustic waves in and around forests is significantly influenced by local meteorological profile structure. Hence to begin to address non uniform forests and forest edges the earlier 1D models are further developed to create a model to calculate the 2D steady state canopy wind flow temperatures turbulent variances Reynolds stress and heat flux.

An acoustic ray path method is applied to the atmospheric surface layer for both uniform and non uniform meteorology and turbulence conditions within and above uniform and non uniform forests. Based on the principles and theory for geometrical acoustics for an inhomogeneous moving medium the ray path methodology predicts the general propagation paths of acoustic waves for a source as they are affected by refraction. Ray paths are computed as a function of range dependent wind and sound speed fields. The Appendix describes the manner in which the ray path method is applied.

Furthermore the acoustic intensity may be due to geometrical divergence i.e. energy loss due to spherical spreading as an inverse function of range and the height difference between two adjacent rays. Also acoustic intensity gain or loss due to frequency dependent ground effects is included in the model calculation. Additionally it is possible to improve the efficiency and realism of the 2D meteorological computer model by introducing a variable grid. A variable grid allows for better distribution of grid points and enables one to extend calculations higher into the boundary layer above the forest. A finer grid inside the forest and a coarser grid above the forest help to resolve important meteorological and acoustic scales and processes. The Appendix describes the manner in which the variable grid technique is applied.

The energy budget for the forest canopy can be calculated as follows. 0 14 where Ris the absorbed radiative flux R is the upward long wave emitted flux T is the canopy surface emissivity 0.98 is the Stefan Boltzmann constant 5.67 10WmK Tis the leaf or tree surface temperature H is the sensible heat flux and L E is the latent heat moisture flux. The absorbed radiative flux R i.e. that which will determine the heating of the leaves branches and the ambient air through the canopy can be written as 1 1 1 1 1 1 15 where Sis a constant i.e. the total direct beam visible flux at the canopy top. Similarly Sis the total direct beam near infrared flux Sis the total diffuse visible flux and Sis the total diffuse near infrared flux at the canopy top . In Equation 15 Sis the remaining available radiative flux at a given level of the canopy. It follows that the coefficient 1 defines the fraction of available radiation intercepted by the leaves at each level . Also in Equation 15 is the long wave absorptivity 1.0 and R is the downward long wave flux as a function of ambient air temperature T. The transmission functions for direct beam visible and direct beam near infrared as a function of distance from the canopy top can be determined from the following expression exp square root over 16 where the mean leaf absorptivity for visible light is approximately 0.8 and for near infrared is approximately 0.2. Also in Equation 16 the extinction coefficient is K 2 cos . The leaf clumping factor describes heterogeneous non uniform distributions of leaves on tree branches. Typical values for the leaf clumping factor are 0.95 Sugar Maple 0.9 Oak 0.7 Aspen 0.5 Jack Pine and 0.4 Black Spruce . When canopy leaves are randomly uniformly distributed 1.0. Finally L is the downward cumulative leaf area index i.e. 

In contrast the transmission functions for diffuse visible light and diffuse near infrared can be written as 

The last term in Equation 15 is the downward long wave flux which can be written as 170.9 1.1954 0.3 19 where the expression on the far right hand side accounts for additional long wave radiation from clouds. In that case fis fractional cloud amount is cloud emmisivity approximately 0.9 1.0 for low to midlevel clouds and Tis the air temperature K at the cloud base. Thus the absorbed radiative flux R given by Equation 15 is now complete.

However there remain several energy budget terms in Equation 14 to be defined. The sensible heat flux for example can be written as 

Again from Equation 14 R H and L E all require a value for the surface temperature T which can be determined using a Penman type expression as 

The Blossom Point Field Test Facility is an approximately 1 600 acre U.S. Army Research Laboratory installation located near La Plata Md. along the Potomac River. Blossom Point is a protected and relatively interference free environment within which to conduct electro optic and acoustic field work. At the time of the experiment the forest subplot of the Blossom Point Field Test Facility is primarily aligned west to east in a rectangle bordered by an open field to the west and south and access roads to the east and north. As viewed from a 30 m meteorological tower at the northwest corner of the subplot the forest crowns overstory are predominantly deciduous with a few intermittent pines. The understory is almost exclusively American. Holly. The deciduous species is predominantly Sweetgum and Red Maple. Canopy heights for the deciduous trees are h 22.4 m on average and the stem count is approximately 1000 ha where 1 hectare ha 10 000 m . Canopy heights for the understory are h 4.1 m on average with the tallest crown tops at h 9.1 m. Finally the forest subplot at Blossom Point is a relatively closed and continuous canopy.

The following results are from numerical experiments that were conducted to simulate the microclimate environment within and above the forest subplot at Blossom Point for typical clear sky midday i.e. 1400 LT atmospheric conditions. Table 4 provides a summary of the experiments which are described in terms of the following model parameters leaf area profile total leaf area index LAI upper level i.e. model top wind speed u friction velocity u in units ms temperature scaling in units K and kinematic heat flux Q u in units mKs. In micrometeorology friction velocity squared is a measure of the horizontal shearing stress and temperature scaling is related to the temperature lapse rate. For this study relative humidity is RH 30 and remains constant within and above the canopy. 

In Experiment 1 the three different cases correspond to the three different leaf area density distribution profiles shown in . It is seen that uand vary slightly as a function of the leaf area profile while Q remains fairly constant. In contrast Experiment 2 keeps the same leaf area distribution profile but tests the sensitivity of the 1D model output for different wind speed conditions. Here it is seen that the wind and temperature scaling i.e. their profile gradients are greatly influenced by the magnitude of the wind at the model top. Finally Experiment 3 keeps the same leaf area profile and wind speeds but tests the sensitivity of the 1D model output to changes in total LAI. In Experiment 3 uremains fairly constant while and Q vary by approximately a factor of three. Hence total LAI also appears to be an important factor i.e. model parameter influencing the canopy microclimate.

Finally shows the modeled profiles for the heat source S for the cases outlined in Experiment 3. The four curves in are defined the same as in . Here it is shown that the computed profiles for Sare greatly affected by the total LAI. Maximum values for Sare shown to vary by a factor of four from LAI 2 to LAI 5. Clearly the sensitivity of the model output to LAI Experiment 3 is much greater than that to the magnitude of the wind at the model top Experiment 2 or to the assumed leaf area distribution profile itself Experiment 1 .

Thus the experiments demonstrate that the microclimate i.e. energy budget of a forest stand at Blossom Point could be explored mathematically via a 1D computer model for forest meteorology. As described above three numerical experiments were conducted. It was found that wind speed and temperature profile gradients are greatly influenced by the assumed leaf area distribution profile as well as the magnitude of the wind at the model top. However total LAI appears to be the most important factor i.e. model parameter influencing the canopy microclimate.

An unexpected result of the experiments was the rather steep computed temperature gradients that occurred in very low wind speed conditions. At midday the model provided by the embodiments herein can potentially generate approximately 4 8 C. leaf to air temperature differences yet the stable inversion layer through the upper canopy of the forest remains shallow and relatively weak 

Additionally the environment characterization data preferably comprises tree height data leaf area density data and drag coefficient data affecting the forest environment. Moreover the embedded radiative transfer and energy budget methodology preferably predicts a heat source within and above the forest environment. Preferably the calculating of the incoming total radiation at the top of the forest environment allows for calculations of a transmission reflection absorption and emission of a solar flux within the forest environment. Also the program meteorology modules may comprise acoustic transmission loss modules acoustic ray path modules one dimensional meteorological modules for forest environments and two dimensional meteorological modules for forest environments. Preferably the two dimensional meteorological modules for the forest environment comprises variable grid modules and wherein the method further comprises applying the variable grid modules to the acoustic transmission loss modules and the acoustic ray path modules.

The embodiments herein can take the form of an entirely hardware embodiment an entirely software embodiment or an embodiment including both hardware and software elements. In a preferred embodiment the embodiments are implemented in software which includes but is not limited to firmware resident software microcode program modules etc.

Furthermore the embodiments herein can take the form of a computer program product accessible from a computer usable or computer readable medium providing program code for use by or in connection with a computer or any instruction execution system. For the purposes of this description a computer usable or computer readable medium can be any apparatus that can comprise store communicate propagate or transport the program for use by or in connection with the instruction execution system apparatus or device.

The medium can be an electronic magnetic optical electromagnetic infrared or semiconductor system or apparatus or device or a propagation medium. Examples of a computer readable medium include a semiconductor or solid state memory magnetic tape a removable computer diskette a random access memory RAM a read only memory ROM a rigid magnetic disk and an optical disk. Current examples of optical disks include compact disk read only memory CD ROM compact disk read write CD R W and DVD.

A data processing system suitable for storing and or executing program code will include at least one processor coupled directly or indirectly to memory elements through a system bus. The memory elements can include local memory employed during actual execution of the program code bulk storage and cache memories which provide temporary storage of at least some program code in order to reduce the number of times code must be retrieved from bulk storage during execution.

Input output I O devices including but not limited to keyboards displays pointing devices etc. can be coupled to the system either directly or through intervening I O controllers. Network adapters may also be coupled to the system to enable the data processing system to become coupled to other data processing systems or remote printers or storage devices through intervening private or public networks. Modems cable modem and Ethernet cards are just a few of the currently available types of network adapters.

A representative hardware environment for practicing the embodiments herein is depicted in . This schematic drawing illustrates a hardware configuration of an information handling computer system in accordance with the embodiments herein. The system comprises at least one processor or central processing unit CPU . The CPUs are interconnected via system bus to various devices such as a random access memory RAM read only memory ROM and an input output I O adapter . The I O adapter can connect to peripheral devices such as disk units and tape drives or other program storage devices that are readable by the system. The system can read the inventive instructions on the program storage devices and follow these instructions to execute the methodology of the embodiments herein. The system further includes a user interface adapter that connects a keyboard mouse speaker microphone and or other user interface devices such as a touch screen device not shown to the bus to gather user input. Additionally a communication adapter connects the bus to a data processing network and a display adapter connects the bus to a display device which may be embodied as an output device such as a monitor printer or transmitter for example.

An advantage of the embodiments herein is that the acoustic ray path models are based on the principles and theory for geometrical acoustics for an inhomogeneous moving medium. Ray paths are thus computed as a function of range dependent wind and sound speed fields. These data are provided independently from 1D and 2D physics based meteorological model for forests. In addition acoustic intensity due to geometrical divergence i.e. energy loss due to spherical spreading is computed as an inverse function of range and the height difference between two adjacent rays. At the same time acoustic intensity gain or loss due to frequency dependent ground effects are included in the model calculation.

Furthermore another advantage of the embodiments herein over the conventional solutions is that the embodiments herein addresses both the thermodynamic and mechanical influences on sound speed within and above forest canopies wherein the numerical methods provided by the embodiments herein are executed in a computationally efficient framework. Hence the embodiments herein provide a useful process to obtain rapid predictions of useful acoustic and meteorological information which can be applied to the study of meteorological aspects of acoustic propagation within and above forests. Some of the conventional techniques are quite computationally intensive. In contrast the embodiments herein are designed within a computationally efficient and economical framework that allows for a rapid prediction and characterization of complex acoustic environments.

The embodiments herein may be useful in assessing the performance of advanced acoustic sensors and communications as well as determining the effectiveness of battlefield computer aids to increase situational awareness. Moreover the embodiments herein may be used to perform acoustic signal detection calculations for acoustic sources of interest within and above forest canopies.

Furthermore the embodiments herein may be utilized in applications studying the effects of forest meteorology on sound blast propagation for noise blast and artillery noise abatement studies at military training sites and for performing acoustic signal detection calculations for acoustic sources of interest within and above forest canopies. Furthermore the embodiments may be utilized in other non military noise abatement applications such as investigating the effectiveness of forests to reduce traffic and or airport noise and the like.

Generally the embodiments herein provide a technique whereby numerical model codes for both meteorology and acoustics reside on a computing device for computationally efficient prediction of useful acoustic and meteorology information within and above uniform and complex forest environments. Furthermore the technique provided by the embodiments herein include the combination of acoustic transmission loss model codes acoustic ray path model codes one dimensional physics based meteorological model codes for forests and two dimensional physics based meteorological model codes for forests. Additionally the implementation of variable grid in two dimensional physics based meteorological model codes for forests combined to acoustic transmission loss model codes and acoustic ray path model codes is provided by the embodiments herein.

Computer program code which may be used to implement the methodology provided by the embodiments herein is provided in electronic form and or CD ROM. The computer program code which is written in FORTRAN language is merely an example of the implementation of the embodiments herein and those skilled in the art would readily understand that other computer program codes could equally be used in accordance with a programmer s preferred choice and the embodiments herein are not limited to any particular computer language or code to implement the embodiments herein.

The foregoing description of the specific embodiments will so fully reveal the general nature of the embodiments herein that others can by applying current knowledge readily modify and or adapt for various applications such specific embodiments without departing from the generic concept and therefore such adaptations and modifications should and are intended to be comprehended within the meaning and range of equivalents of the disclosed embodiments. It is to be understood that the phraseology or terminology employed herein is for the purpose of description and not of limitation. Therefore while the embodiments herein have been described in terms of preferred embodiments those skilled in the art will recognize that the embodiments herein can be practiced with modification within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.

