---

title: Helicopter with torque-correcting thruster device
abstract: A helicopter having a torque-correcting thruster device. The helicopter has an aerodynamic body which has opposite side portions, a top portion and a bottom portion. The aerodynamic body has a cockpit and a pilot seat in the cockpit. The helicopter includes landing gear attached to the bottom portion of the aerodynamic body. The helicopter includes a rotor that is supported by the aerodynamic body and a rotor blade attached to the rotor, and a thruster device operative on one of the side portions of the aerodynamic body to produce an aft-directed thrust that counteracts the torque produced by rotation of the rotor blade so as to control the yaw of the helicopter. The aft-directed thrust simultaneously supplements the forward thrust of the helicopter.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07077358&OS=07077358&RS=07077358
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07077358
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050127
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

Helicopters have either one or two main lifting rotors. Controlling yaw is essential in preventing the helicopter from spinning out of control. In tandem rotor helicopters those helicopters having two lifting rotors both the propulsive force and those forces required for directional or yaw control are provided by the main rotors. An inherent aspect of controlling the yaw of the single rotor helicopter is the counteraction of the torque generated in driving the main rotor of the helicopter. This torque tends to rotate the entire aircraft in a direction opposite to the rotation of the main lifting rotor. This torque is generated by the resistance of the air to the driving of the rotor. The force required to counteract the torque is relatively large compared to the amount of force required to vary the attitude of the aircraft about its yaw axis. B and C show a conventional single rotor helicopter . In this type of helicopter the propulsive force is provided by main lifting rotor and rotor blades while yaw control has generally been provided by a second and smaller stabilizing rotor located at the rear or tail of boom . Rotor rotates counter clockwise as indicated by arrows . Stabilizing rotor controls the yaw of helicopter . Rotor blades overlap and rotate over a portion of boom . As shown in rotor blades rotate counter clockwise as indicated by arrows . The primary direction of flight of helicopter is indicated by arrow . Stabilizing rotor produces a sideways thrust indicated by arrow . Main lifting rotor produces a downward thrust indicated by reference numeral . Sideways thrust does not contribute to the forward thrust of the helicopter and is therefore wasted. A moment arm is defined by the distance D between stabilizing rotor as measured from reference axis and main rotor axis .

A conventional tandem rotor helicopter is shown in . Tandem rotor helicopter has main rotor that rotates blade in one direction and a second main rotor that rotates blade in an opposite direction. The simultaneous operation of main rotors and substantially eliminates net torque effect. However the tandem rotor configuration is relatively complex and expensive. Furthermore tandem rotor helicopters are typically not as maneuverable as single rotor helicopters.

Another prior art technique to counteract the aforementioned torque has been to use two lifting rotors mounted on a common shaft wherein the rotors rotate in opposite directions. The torque generated each rotor counteracts the other rotor. By changing the torque of one rotor relative to the other directional control is achieved. A further prior art manner in which directional control is accomplished has been to mount jets at the tail of the rotor craft. However these prior art devices contribute significantly to the cost of the helicopter. Furthermore the size of the helicopter must be increased in order to implement these prior art configurations for controlling yaw.

The prior art in Daggett Jr. et al. U.S. Pat. No. 3 957 226 Daggett and Allongue U.S. Pat. No. 5 240 205 Allongue describe various apparatuses and devices to counteract torque. For example Daggett describes ducted air flow that is directed aft and which flows downward through the center of the helicopter tail identified as the aft portion . However such ducted air flow does not provide counter torque. When the flow is directed to the side such side directed flow may provide a torque correcting flow but does not contribute to the forward movement of the aircraft. Furthermore the air flows are shared. This means that the more flow that is used to produce counter torque less flow is available for use in forward thrust. Thus if all the flow is used for counter torque then no flow will be available for forward thrust. Conversely if all the flow is used for forward thrust then no flow will be available for counter torque. Allongue U.S. Pat. No. 5 240 205 describes a helicopter having a single mechanically driven lift and propulsion rotor and a fuselage that is rearwardly elongate. The helicopter has an anti torque system that comprises an auxiliary anti torque rotor whose axis is substantially transverse relative to the elongate fuselage and which is disposed at the rear end of the fuselage to generate a first transverse force. This transverse force opposes the torque exerted on the fuselage by the lift and propulsion rotor of the helicopter. The anti torque system includes a blowing anti torque device that comprises at least one longitudinal slot formed in the side of the portion of the elongate fuselage that is subjected to the downdraft from the lift and propulsion rotor. The longitudinal slot is fed with fluid under pressure that it ejects downward in a manner that is at least approximately tangential to the portion of the fuselage to generate a second transverse force in the same direction as the first transverse force. The anti torque system also has a vertical fin disposed at the rear end of the elongate fuselage. The vertical fin has a particular profile such that during forward flight the vertical fin generates lateral lift in the same direction as the first and second transverse forces. However the aforementioned blowing device is not used to directly counter the main rotor torque. Rather the blower redirects some of the main rotor downward flow and forces to a slightly lateral direction. The redirected main rotor flow forces counteract the main rotor torque. Stated another way the force of the blowing device does not counter the torque of the main rotor and thrust and does not impart an aft directed thrust or force. Instead the blowing device functions as a fluidic device that causes the rotor flow to move in a different direction rather than substantially straight down. A significant disadvantage of the anti torque system of Allongue is the substantial cost in implementing such a system.

What is needed is a new and improved helicopter that addresses the issue of yaw control but which is relatively less complex than prior art helicopter configurations and does not utilize wasteful side forces as a means of counteracting main rotor torque.

Therefore an object of the present invention is to provide a new and improved helicopter that is configured to efficiently and accurately control yaw.

Another object of the present invention to provide a new and improved helicopter that is configured to efficiently and accurately control yaw and which has relatively lower manufacturing cost.

It is another object of the present invention to provide a new and improved helicopter that is configured to efficiently and accurately control yaw and which allows the overall size of the helicopter to be reduced.

A significant feature of the thrusting device is that it produces counter torque and forward thrust out of the same aft directed air flow or thrust. Thus an increase in counter torque produced by the aft directed thrust causes a proportional increase in forward thrust.

Thus in accordance with the aforesaid objects the present invention is directed to a helicopter having an apparatus for efficiently controlling the yaw of a helicopter which comprises a rearward facing thrusting device. The thrusting device aims in an aft or backward direction and supplies a restoring torque to the helicopter without having any deleterious effects on the capability of the helicopter to turn and hover. The thrusting device counters and controls the main rotor torque while adding to the forward thrust of the helicopter. The thrusting device can be fully integrated into the craft within the basic contour of the helicopter body or mounted to the exterior of the helicopter.

In one embodiment the rearward facing thruster device is mounted or located on the side of the helicopter which when the thruster device is producing the aft directed thrust counteracts the main rotor torque. For example if the single main rotor as viewed from above the helicopter looking down at the rotor is rotating counter clockwise then the thruster device is located on the right side of the helicopter as viewed from the rear of the helicopter and a predetermined distance from the main rotor axis center line. Any extra thrust required from the thruster device as a result of the thruster device being located closer to the main rotor axis center line is used to supplement the forward thrust of the helicopter.

The thruster device can be configured as a pod that is attached to the side of the helicopter and which has a rotor mechanism located therein. The thruster device also can be configured as a jet engine a propeller driven by a piston or a turbo prop power plant or a hybrid type jet engine turbo generator that supplies mechanical power to the main rotor and has sufficient thrust to still act like a jet.

An advantage of the present invention is that preexisting helicopters can be configured or retrofitted in accordance with the invention. Thus the thrusting device can be mounted on the pre existing helicopter. In the case of new helicopters that are to be manufactured in accordance with the invention the thrusting device can be integrally formed with the body of the helicopter or attached to the exterior of the helicopter.

Another advantage of the present invention is that helicopters can be configured without tail rotors and tail rudders. Thus helicopters manufactured in accordance with the present invention can be made relatively shorter than conventional helicopters. Relatively smaller dimension helicopters would provide significant benefits in the application of aircraft carrier based helicopters since available space on an aircraft carrier is at a premium. In another embodiment the helicopter can be configured with a relatively small sized tail e.g. similar to a skeg or a relatively small sized tail rudder structure. In such an embodiment the thruster device can be optionally mounted to the side of the aforementioned small sized tail.

Thus in one aspect the present invention is directed to a helicopter that comprises an aerodynamic body that has a left side portion a right side portion a top portion a bottom portion and a cockpit area. The helicopter further includes a pilot seat in the cockpit landing gear attached to the bottom portion of the aerodynamic body and a rotor supported by the aerodynamic body. The rotor has a portion extending from the top portion of the aerodynamic body. The helicopter further includes rotor blades that are attached to the portion of the rotor that extends from the top portion of the aerodynamic body. The rotor blades rotate above the aerodynamic body wherein rotation of the rotor blades produces a torque. The helicopter further includes a thruster device operative on one of the side portions of the aerodynamic body to produce an aft directed thrust that counteracts the torque to control the yaw of the helicopter and supplements the forward thrust of the helicopter.

Thus the present invention is a device rearward thrusting attached to a helicopter to efficiently and economically control the yaw of the helicopter without interfering with helicopter operation.

Referring to and there is shown helicopter in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. Helicopter comprises aerodynamic body and rotor that is supported by aerodynamic body . Rotor includes rotating shaft not shown in but see to which rotor blades are attached. Helicopter further includes landing gear and thruster device . Aerodynamic body has left and right side portions and respectively. As used herein the term left side portion refers to that portion of the aerodynamic body that is left of a center line or axis CL of rotor when viewing helicopter from the rear and from the perspective of pilots as shown in . Similarly as used herein the term right side portion refers to that portion of the aerodynamic body that is left of the center line or axis CL of rotor when viewing helicopter from the front as shown in . As used herein the term side portion may refer to either the left side portion or the right side portion. Aerodynamic body further includes top and bottom portions and respectively. Landing gear is attached to bottom portion . Thruster device is attached to right side portion . In this embodiment thruster device comprises a pod that is mounted or attached to exterior wall of right side portion of helicopter . A thrust producing mechanism is located within pod . In one embodiment this thrust producing mechanism comprises rotor mechanism . However thruster device can be configured as any one of several suitable devices capable of producing an aft directed thrust. Examples of suitable thruster devices include jet engines propellers turbo prop engines and rocket engines. Some of these alternate thruster devices are described in the ensuing description. In one embodiment rotor mechanism rotates counter clockwise and rotor blades rotate counter clockwise. Helicopter further includes cockpit and seat . Seat can be configured for one or two pilots .

Referring to the perimeter of the area swept by rotor blades is indicated by reference numeral and is also referred to herein as a rotor blade operational perimeter. Rotor blades rotate counter clockwise as indicated by arrow . The direction of flight of helicopter is indicated by arrows . Helicopter has a moment arm that is defined by the distance between rotor and thruster device and which is substantially smaller than the moment arm indicated by distance D in prior art helicopter see . Reference axes and are shown in to facilitate understanding of the moment arm of helicopter . Reference axis extends through the axis of rotor and reference axis bisects thruster device . The moment arm of helicopter is defined by distance D between reference axes and . In accordance with the invention thruster device produces an aft directed thrust that is indicated by reference number . The restoring force resulting from aft directed thrust is indicated by reference number . Restoring force counteracts the torque generated by rotor and rotor blades . The aft directed thrust also supplements the forward thrust of helicopter . An important feature of helicopter is that it does not utilize an extending fuselage boom such as fuselage boom of prior art helicopter see B and C and therefore has no tail rotor. A significant feature of helicopter is that no portion of aerodynamic body extends beyond rotor blade operational perimeter . Thus the overall size of helicopter is relatively smaller than conventional helicopters. Another feature of helicopter is that except for thruster device aerodynamic body is symmetrically configured and landing gear and rotor are all symmetrically located with respect to aerodynamic body . Seat is also symmetrically located within cockpit .

Referring to and there is shown helicopter in accordance with another embodiment of the present invention. Helicopter comprises aerodynamic body which has top portion bottom portion left side portion and right side portion . Landing gear is attached to bottom portion . Helicopter includes a rotor rotating shaft and rotor blades that are attached to rotating shaft . Rotor blades have rotor blade operational perimeter . Rotor blades are rotating counter clockwise as indicated by arrow . The direction of flight of helicopter is indicated by arrow . In accordance with the invention helicopter comprises thruster device . Thruster device comprises a supporting arm that is attached to the external or exterior wall of right side portion . Thruster device further comprises engine and propeller that is driven by engine . In one embodiment propeller is a two bladed propeller although a propeller having more than two blades can be used as well. Propeller rotates counter clockwise. Supporting arm has a length that is sufficient to provide necessary clearance between propeller and aerodynamic body . Thruster device performs the same function as thruster device described in the foregoing description. Specifically thruster device produces an aft directed thrust that counteracts the torque generated by rotor and rotor blade and supplements the forward thrust of helicopter . Except for the addition of thruster device helicopter is structurally symmetric.

Referring to there is shown a helicopter in accordance with a further embodiment of the present invention. Helicopter comprises aerodynamic body rotor and rotor blades . Rotor blades have rotor blade operational perimeter . Aerodynamic body includes cockpit top portion bottom portion left side portion and right side portion . Landing gear is attached to bottom portion . Helicopter includes thruster device . Thruster device comprises a rotor mechanism similar to rotor mechanism described in the foregoing description. However thruster device can also be configured as a jet engine. In accordance with this embodiment thruster device is incorporated within aerodynamic body and located on right side portion . The thruster device is located within the symmetrical external dimensions of helicopter . Aerodynamic body has intake port and exhaust port that are integral to aerodynamic body . Intake port and exhaust port are aligned with the intake port and exhaust port respectively of thruster device . The intake port of thruster device is indicated by reference number and the exhaust port of the thruster device is not shown. Referring to rotor blades rotate counter clock wise as indicated by arrow . The direction of flight of helicopter is indicated by reference number . Thruster device performs the same function as thruster devices and described in the foregoing description. Specifically thruster device produces aft directed thrust which counteracts the torque produced by the counter clockwise rotation of rotor blades and supplements the forward thrust of helicopter . Thus aft directed thrust functions as a counter torque that counteracts the torque produced by rotor blades . The incorporation of thruster device within aerodynamic body can be combined with current stealth technology to provide a helicopter having stealth characteristics. In such an embodiment the location of the thruster device is such that current stealth technology can be readily incorporated and applied.

Referring to there is shown helicopter in accordance with another embodiment of the present invention. Helicopter is generally the same in construction as helicopter with the exception of the addition of a balancing device which is described in the ensuing description. Helicopter comprises aerodynamic body rotor rotor blades and landing gear . Aerodynamic body includes cockpit left side portion and right side portion . Helicopter includes thruster device that has the same function and construction as thruster device described in the foregoing description. In accordance with this embodiment thruster device is incorporated within aerodynamic body and located on right side portion and a balancing device is incorporated within aerodynamic body and located on left side portion . The weight of balancing device offsets the weight of thruster device . In this embodiment balancing device comprises a weapon such as a rocket launcher or machine gun. It is to be understood that balancing device can be configured as any other device such as a sensor array or other type of radar component as long as balancing device has a weight similar to thruster device . Cockpit is symmetrically located within aerodynamic body and is symmetrically positioned with respect to thruster device and balancing device .

Referring to there is shown helicopter in accordance with another embodiment of the present invention. Helicopter comprises aerodynamic body rotor rotor blades and landing gear . Aerodynamic body includes cockpit left side portion and right side portion . Helicopter includes thruster device that has the same function and construction as thruster device described in the foregoing description. In accordance with this embodiment thruster device is incorporated within aerodynamic body and cockpit is asymmetrically located within aerodynamic body and is offset toward left side portion . Thus the weight of the pilots seat and the weight of the pilots combine to counteract the weight of thruster device and provide balance to helicopter . Although shows that cockpit is configured for two pilots it is to be understood that cockpit can be configured for a single pilot.

Referring to there is shown a helicopter in accordance with another embodiment of the invention wherein the thruster device and balancing device are located external to the aerodynamic body of the helicopter and on opposite side portions of the aerodynamic body. Helicopter comprises aerodynamic body rotor rotor blades and landing gear . Aerodynamic body includes cockpit left side portion and right side portion . Helicopter includes thruster device that has the same purpose as thruster devices and described in the foregoing description i.e. to produce an aft directed thrust that counteracts the torque produced by the rotor and supplements the forward thrust of helicopter . In this embodiment thruster device is configured as a jet engine. In accordance with this embodiment thruster device is mounted or attached to the exterior or external wall of right side portion and a balancing object is mounted or attached to the exterior or external wall of left side portion . The weight of balancing device offsets the weight of thruster device . In this embodiment balancing device comprises a weapon such as a rocket launcher or machine gun. It is to be understood that balancing device can be configured as any other suitable device necessary for completion of a mission such as a sensor array or other type of radar component. Cockpit is symmetrically located within aerodynamic body and is symmetrically located with respect to thruster device and balancing device .

In an alternate embodiment the rotor is offset to the side portion that is opposite the side portion on which the thruster device is operative.

Although the foregoing description is in terms of the thruster device being located generally under the rotor blades and adjacent to the rotor other configurations are possible. For example if the helicopter is configured to have a relatively smaller size in comparison to prior art helicopters and such smaller size helicopter has a small sized boom then the thruster device can be mounted to the appropriate side of the boom.

In a preferred embodiment a pilot piloting the helicopter of the present invention does not directly control the thruster device in order to control yaw of the helicopter. Preferably the actual power of the thruster device and the generated counter torque is controlled by on board control devices that respond automatically to an increase or decrease in forward speed or assent or descent of the helicopter. Thus the pilot s maneuvering of the throttle lever joystick or any control device results in automatic adjustments to the operation of the thruster device.

In another embodiment the helicopter of the present invention is configured to operate without a pilot.

The principles preferred embodiments and modes of operation of the present invention have been described in the foregoing specification. The invention which is intended to be protected herein should not however be construed as limited to the particular forms disclosed as these are to be regarded as illustrative rather than restrictive. Variations in changes may be made by those skilled in the art without departing from the spirit of the invention. Accordingly the foregoing detailed description should be considered exemplary in nature and not limited to the scope and spirit of the invention as set forth in the attached claims.

