---

title: Strain sensitive coax cable sensors for monitoring structures
abstract: The invention provides increased structural monitoring systems that have sensitive continuous coaxial cable sensors. A preferred embodiment sensor cable of the invention includes an inner conductor, a dielectric jacket, and an outer conductor that is configured to passively deform responsively to strain in an associated structure. The deformation can be aided by the physical structure of the dielectric jacket, the outer conductor, or a combination of both. The deformation translates strain into a measurable change in a reflection coefficient associated with the outer conductor.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07421910&OS=07421910&RS=07421910
owner: The Curators of the university of Missouri
number: 07421910
owner_city: Columbia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051006
---
This application claims priority under 35 U.S.C. 119 from prior provisional application Ser. No. 60 616 670 filed Oct. 7 2004.

This application was made with Government assistance through U.S. National Science Foundation Award Nos. CMS 9733123 and CMS 0200381. The Government has certain rights in this invention.

The field of the invention is structural health monitoring. Specific fields of the invention include wave guided electromagnetic cable sensors using electrical time domain reflectometry ETDR and electrical time domain transmission ETDT .

Electrical Time Domain Reflectometry ETDR uses the propagation of electromagnetic wave to determine the location and nature of various reflectors. Information is derived from reflections of a voltage pulse sent through a transmission medium namely a transmission cable.

Electrical time domain transmission ETDT is another technique that has been used to monitor conductors. In electrical time domain transmission the coupling of two waveguides is monitored. Electrical time domain transmission is used in the semiconductor industry to measure and test circuit responses.

In ETDR a voltage pulse generated by a signal generator is sent through a transmission cable and reflections of the voltage pulse are sensed with a time domain reflectometer TDR sampling head. When the pulse encounters any discontinuity for example partial loss of a cross section of the cable a portion of it is reflected back towards the sampling head. The arrival time and amplitude of the reflected signal include the information on distance between the points of monitoring and discontinuity and the severity of damage at the discontinuity point respectively. The directly measurable parameter reflection coefficient represents the percentage of the reflected wave to an incident wave or the change in characteristic impedance of the transmission medium.

ETDR has been developed and used for monitoring the health of cables themselves such as the cables used in communication systems. Since the 1950s power and telecommunication industries have used ETDR to locate and identify faults in transmission cables. ETDR has also been applied to a limited extent in other industries and there is interest in using ETDR and sensor cables to monitor other structures. For example geotechnics has used ETDR to monitor rock masses or other geotechnical facilities that often undergo significant movement in a widespread area. There have also been attempts to monitor other structures but it is believed that known techniques have produced a small signal to deformation ratio. The lack of sensitivity to deformation of commonly used commercial cables greatly limits the general applicability of ETDR for sensing defects in structures such as structural members in buildings bridges roads and the like.

The invention provides structural monitoring systems that have sensitive continuous coaxial cable sensors. A preferred embodiment sensor cable of the invention includes an inner conductor a dielectric jacket and an outer conductor that is configured to passively deform responsively to strain in an associated structure. The deformation can be aided by the physical structure of the dielectric jacket the outer conductor or a combination of both. The deformation translates strain into a measurable change in a reflection coefficient associated with the outer conductor.

The invention provides structural monitoring systems that have sensitive continuous coaxial cable sensors. A preferred embodiment sensor cable of the invention includes an inner conductor a dielectric jacket and an outer conductor that is configured to passively deform responsively to strain in an associated structure. The deformation can be aided by the physical structure of the dielectric jacket the outer conductor or a combination of both. The deformation translates strain into a measurable change in a reflection coefficient associated with the outer conductor.

An example outer conductor in preferred embodiments is a thin conductive spiral wrap. Without deformation the outer conductor essentially forms an electrically continuous cylinder. Strain imparted by an associated structure creates local gaps in the outer conductor. The dielectric jacket can be a flexible continuous material such as silicon rubber. In other embodiments the dielectric jacket is a spiral plastic tube. Strain causes localized separations in the spiral plastic tube that impart separations to an outer conductor such as a spiral wrap or a thin conductive coating such as a conductive paint or a thin metallization.

A preferred embodiment ETDT sensor cable of the invention includes an inner conductor dielectric jacket and an outer conductor and a second outer conductor. An electrical shield separates the outer conductor and second outer conductor. Strain imparted to the sensor cable creates localized gaps in the shield to create coupling between the outer conductor and the second outer conductor.

In a preferred embodiment a spiral wrapping copper tape is used as outer conductor. Other configurations for the outer conductor are possible as well. The outer conductor includes a pattern such as a spiral repeating slots or other patterns that produce a change in electrical reflectance primarily attributable to the creation of additional inductance when the dielectric tube is deformed. From an electrical perspective the outer conductor is a continuous cylinder. From a physical perspective it is configured create a change in the electrical response at any point along its length where strain of an associated structure creates a deformation of the cable sensor.

Preferred embodiments of the invention will now be illustrated with respect to the drawings. Artisans will appreciate broader aspects of the invention from the preferred embodiments.

Referring now to a preferred embodiment system for Electrical Time Domain Reflectometry ETDR includes a signal generator and detector that uses an ETDR sensor head to pass signals into a sensor cable . Reflections caused along the length of the sensor cable for example at a distance x from the sensor head by a deformation are reflected back toward the sensor head and detected. The arrival time and amplitude of the reflected signal includes information on distance between the points of monitoring and deformation and the severity of damage at the deformation providing localized information regarding the deformation. The sensor cable details of which are shown in is sensitive to small strains transferred to it by an associated structure over its length which defines a sensing length. The sensor cable includes structure to translate localized strains in the associated structure into a measurable reflectivity coefficient change.

As seen in a preferred embodiment sensor cable includes an outer conductor that is a spirally wrapped conductive foil e.g. a copper foil that is wrapped around a dielectric jacket . The outer conductor 20 for example can be a copper foil tape adhered to the dielectric jacket . The spiral wrapping of the outer conductor has turns that preferably overlap slightly. Small physical gaps are permitted between turns but in the embodiment the outer conductor is electrically a cylindrical surface. Alternatively any two adjacent rounds of the outer conductor can be separated with a small gap which is bridged by conductive material such as solder or with conductive paint. The overlap point of adjacent turns of the spiral wraps of the outer conductor serve as points of discontinuity in the outer conductor when a strain is applied to the coax cable sensor as the turns of the outer conductor will separate locally in response to strain imparted locally. This produces a measurable reflectivity coefficient change.

The dielectric jacket is formed from a flexible material such as silicon rubber in preferred embodiments which facilitates deformation of the outer conductor both longitudinally and transversely in response to strain of an associated structure. This produces a measurable reflectivity coefficient change. This permits for example the sensor cable to passively respond to the strain transferred from concrete when it is embedded in reinforced concrete RC members while the sensor has little or no effect on the stress state of the RC members. The dielectric jacket can also be formed from stiff material such as plastic but configured to facilitate deformation of the outer conductor both longitudinally and transversely. For example the dielectric jacket can be a spiral plastic tube. Separations in the spiral impart gaps to the outer conductor which can be a spiral conductive wrap for example or a thin conductive coating that cracks in responsive to separations of spirals in the dielectric jacket .

The preferred embodiment sensor cable defines an air gap between the dielectric jacket and an inner conductor . The dielectric jacket insulates the inner conductor from the outer conductor over the sensing length of the coax cable sensor . The small air gap between the inner conductor a single wire in a preferred embodiment and dielectric jacket reduces friction between the inner conductor and the dielectric. This facilitates their relative movement. The air gap also reduces overall axial stiffness of the sensor cable aiding its installation in structures of interest. The small air gap also facilitates the longitudinal elongation of the dielectric jacket when stresses are applied to the cable sensor from an associated structure.

Features of the cable sensor may be optimized for particular applications. The relative dimensions number of spiral turns in preferred outer conductors and dielectric jackets can be optimized. The general equation for ETDR measurements is F

In a cable sensor is configured for ETDT an includes a second outer conductor separated from the outer conductor by a shield . In the second outer conductor is for example an insulated wire or plurality of wires. The shield is spirally formed perforated thinned etc. periodically so that strains will impart gaps in the shield . The outer conductor acts as a first waveguide and the second outer conductor acts as a second waveguide. Strain that creates gaps in the shield causes a coupling between the outer conductor and the second outer conductor .

In a cable sensor includes an outer conductor is a thin continuous conductor such as a metal layer or a conductive paint. The dielectric jacket is a soft dielectric such as foam rubber for example. The outer conductor is wrapped with a constrictor such a relatively stiff spiral steel wire. Elongation of the cable sensor causes the constrictor to increase the reduction of cable cross section.

Cables sensors ETDR and TDT systems of the invention provide for highly sensitive structural monitoring devices. The sensitivity of cable sensors of the invention was investigated with experiments. The experiments and data will now be discussed. Artisans will recognize additional features and advantages of the invention from the discussion. Artisans will also recognize that techniques and specific structures of cables sensors constructed for experiments will have corollaries in mass manufacturing techniques that will differ somewhat from the experimental prototypes.

A comparative test was conducted on two identical cables except for their outer conductors. One cable was a prototype cable sensor consistent with . The structure was as in with an air gap between the inner conductor and the dielectric jacket. The inner conductor was a single wire the dielectric jacket was rubber and the outer conductor was spirally wrapped copper tape. The other was made with a braided copper shielding as the outer conductor. Each cable was set up with one end fixed and the other end roller supported. An axial load was applied at the end of the roller support. Their experimental results at two strain levels are presented in braided copper cable and B prototype cable sensor of the invention . It is clearly shown that the prototype cable sensor has sensitivity of several orders higher than the sensor with the braided copper shielding. During the test of the prototype cable sensor of the invention a significant increase in reflection coefficient was observed when two adjacent rounds of the spiral wrapping tape separated completely. On the other hand for the cable with the braided copper shielding it was difficult to differentiate the reflection coefficients at different strain levels. The tooth pattern of measurement was due to the slow sampling rate used during testing. Note that the manual assembly approaches used in the experiment were copper tape was manually wrapped and held to the dielectric jacket by conductive adhesive include significant non uniformities that would not be present in commercially manufactured cable sensors. Accordingly manufacturing techniques are expected to increase sensitivity and permit use of other materials for the outer conductor such as patterned metal coatings conductive paints and epoxies etc.

Four prototype sensors consistent with were made and used in bending tests of RC beams. Their dimensions and characteristic impedance are presented in Table 1. The diameter of the sensors and the width of the copper tape were determined based on the available materials from the market and the insight gained through the analytical study. These sensors can be classified into two groups by their size Sensor I and Sensor II have a larger diameter of outer and inner conductor than Sensor III and Sensor IV. Each group has two cables with different copper tape widths. The dimension of the cable determines the cable s characteristic impedance and the value of the extra inductance. The copper tape width determines the density of the separation turns which leads to the different values of extra inductance.

Before embedding each sensor into concrete numerical simulations were conducted to better understand and verify the sensor s performance. They were carried out with the FIDELITY software to investigate the sensor s response and its sensitivity. The Finite Difference Time Domain FDTD model of the simulated sensors is shown in which respectively show the separation of one to four turns of the outer conductor. The sensors are simulated under different situations when the spiral wrapping copper tape is either partially separated or completely separated to separate one to four turns. For the outer conductor in the simulation sufficiently thin spiral wires are accumulated to model the spiral wrapping copper tape. A small gap was created to represent the separation part. The sensors were excited by a Gaussian impulse which was integrated over the time to obtain the ETDR voltage waveform. By definition the reflection coefficient can be determined by integrating the voltage waveform over the time.

The length between separations of the outer conductor and the turn density can more precisely describe the sensors behavior when the sensors are embedded in concrete because the length between separations is directly related to the crack width. Therefore it is necessary to convert the number of turns into the length between separations to examine the sensors performance. illustrates the relationship between the reflection coefficient and the length between separations. It can be observed from the figure that the sensors made of inch wide copper tape Sensor I and Sensor III provide a larger value of the reflection coefficient because of their higher turn density. The higher turn density corresponds to a larger value of the extra inductance for a certain length between separations and this leads to a larger value of the reflection coefficient. The highest slope of the curves in corresponds to the most sensitive range of the separation distance. This range can be used to guide an optimum design of a sensor. For Sensor I and Sensor III this range is between 0.1 and 0.25 inch over which the reflection coefficient linearly increases with the length between separations. Since the width of a concrete crack of engineering interest is less than 0.1 inch the length between separations of a sensor embedded in the concrete is likely within 0.3 inch due to sudden release of energy associated with a crack. Therefore the two sensors made of a inch wide copper tape are expected to perform satisfactorily.

To fully understand the sensors performance it is helpful to examine the value of the extra inductance. The value of the extra inductance can be determined according to the ETDR waveform from the simulation results. For the four sensors under investigation the reflection coefficient can be plotted as a function of the extra inductance as shown in . The value of the extra inductance is in the order of nano Henry for these four sensors which belongs to the sensitive range. The reflection coefficient increases nonlinearly with the extra inductance. The smaller the characteristic impedance of sensors Sensor III and Sensor IV the higher their sensitivity. Considering the slope of the curves in Sensor III and Sensor IV are in the best sensitive range under four complete separation turns. While for Sensor I and Sensor II due to the large value of the extra inductance for three and four separation turns the curves become less and less sensitive. Combining the observations from it can be concluded that within the same length between separations which is associated with the crack width Sensor III is considered as the best design among the four sensors due to its smaller geometry smaller characteristic impedance and high sensitivity.

When embedded in concrete a cable sensor of the invention can be used to measure the strain along the length of the sensor or the elongation at the location of cracks. To correlate the reflection coefficient from ETDR measurements with the strain applied on the sensor calibration tests were conducted on Sensor III before the sensors were put into concrete beams. Each sensor was made with a single wire of 24 AWG. The calibration of the sensors was carried out with tension tests. To investigate the effect of separation turns on the reflection coefficient the sensors tested had a varying number of turns of the spiral wrapping copper tape.

Strain tests were conducted on prototype coax cable sensors of the invention. Small sections of prototype cable sensors were created in a longer cable that had a convention construction. Each prototype cable sensor was set up in the horizontal position during the tests. The cable sensor was loaded at both ends with a pair of equal loads to minimize potential deformation at fixed supports since the rubber dielectric jackets used in the prototype cable sensors is very flexible and can be easily stretched with a small load. To ensure the potential sagging of the cable to the minimum additional support was provided around the mid span. The elongation of the cable was measured with an LVDT toward a right end of the cable. As mentioned above only a portion of the tested cables was constructed in accordance with the invention while the remaining portions were similar to commercial cables. The deflection measured over the entire length of a cable is converted into the strain applied on the portion of the cable constructed according to the invention based on its stiffness and length relative to the remaining portion.

The results showed a jump in reflection coefficient a certain strain level that corresponded to the separation of spiral turns of the copper outer conductor. All measured curves showed a different degree of slope jump at a certain strain level which corresponds to a significant separation of adjacent turns. However the slope jump occurred at different strain levels even for the identical cables. This inconsistency of the separation of the cables was due to the non uniformity of the fabrication of the prototype cables which results from the manual assembly techniques and would be eliminated or minimized in a commercial produced cable sensor of the invention.

Overall the tests confirmed that the peak value of the reflection coefficient increases with the separation turns. The results also shows that as load increases the dominant wave grows steadily in terms of amplitude and bandwidth except for a quick jump at a certain strain level. Additionally it was observed that the dominant peak was attributable to the cable section constructed according to the invention.

From the calibration tests it was found that the cable sensors of the invention were highly sensitive to applied strain. To understand their sensitivity in applications a dozen cables were fabricated in accordance with and they were mounted in pair near the tension surface of each of six RC beams. Three of the beams had two No.3 longitudinal rebars and the other three were reinforced with two No. 4 rebars. Each sensor was fabricated with a rubber tube dielectric jacket and spirally wrapped copper tape outer conductor. Sensor I was mounted on Beam and Sensor IV was on Beam The details of dimension and re enforcement for test beams and are shown in . The details of dimension and re enforcement for test beams and are shown in .

Representative results are presented for of two of the RC beams that were tested with a Tinius Olsen loading machine. The deflection of each beam was measured using a dial gauge. Under progressive loading Beam cracked mainly at mid span. The first dominant crack passed through half of the section and the second crack approximately two inches from the first one was observed during the tests. The concrete crack occurs at 4 kips and the reinforcement of the beam yields around 10 kips. Sensor IV showed sensitivity to the two cracks that were inches apart as seen in . Corresponding to the crack patterns observed in the beams the reflection coefficient along the entire length of the beam reaches the maxima at two locations one more significant than the other as seen in . It is also observed that the reflection coefficient other than the mid span region is all within 0.002 0.003 indicating small elongation in the non cracking area. The reflection coefficient shown in represents the difference of measurement at any load from the baseline measurement when the beam is unloaded.

Beam developed many cracks across a substantial span portion of its mid span. In this case due to the presence of multiple cracks the load displacement relation appears truly nonlinear after the first crack corresponding to a load of approximately 4 kips. The yielding of the reinforcement occurs around 20 kips which is twice the ultimate load of Beam due to the use of No. 4 reinforcement instead of No. 3. The sensed reflection coefficient is shown in . The local maxima of the reflection coefficient curve shown in correspond to the locations of multiple cracks observed on the beam. It was also observed that the change in reflection coefficient generally follows the sequence of crack development. The peak coefficient observed reached 0.08 for Beam

For each RC beam tested the width of a crack at mid span was measured with an extensometer. The peak reflection coefficient of the beam corresponding to the first crack is plotted in as a function of crack width. It can be observed from the figure that for Beam Sensor IV the reflection coefficient linearly increases with crack width up to 0.0061 in. For Beam Sensor I the coefficient increases linearly with crack width up to 0.002 in. then with a higher slope corresponding to the rapid increase in separation of the cable outer conductor up to 0.0033 in. After that the coefficient width curve resumes the initial slope up to 0.0047 in. and eventually appears to have a reduced slope due to the effect of adjacent cracks. These results agree with the calibration results discussed above.

As shown from the above results discussion test coax cable sensors of the invention demonstrate high sensitivity in strain measurement and crack detection of an associated structure as validated with laboratory tests of RC beams. The numerical simulations and experiments show 10 50 times more sensitivity to strain effect than commercial coax cables and an ability to measure a reflection coefficient of 6 7 per unit strain. The location of cracks identified from beam tests matches well with the physical pattern observed from the test specimens. The cable sensor of the invention enables differentiation of the location of cracks of that are inches apart. Commercially fabricated sensor of the invention will have even better performance as the manual assembly techniques used for prototypes lacks the precision and consistency offered by commercial assembly.

Coax cable sensors ETDR and TDT sensor systems of the invention provide an important tool for the monitoring of civil infrastructure. Buildings bridges roads dams etc. can be accurately monitored with cable sensors and sensors systems of the invention.

While specific embodiments of the present invention have been shown and described it should be understood that other modifications substitutions and alternatives are apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Such modifications substitutions and alternatives can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention which should be determined from the appended claims.

