---

title: Ballistic impact detection system
abstract: A wearable ballistic impact protection system detects impacts to a body. The system includes multiple sensors for detecting vibration. The sensed vibrations are converted to electrical signals which are filtered. Electronic components are provided to determine whether the filtered signal have frequency and amplitude characteristics of impact that cause injury to a body. Preferably, the sensors are Piezo-electric film sensing elements. Information regarding the extent of the impact and injuries to the body may be transmitted to a remote location so that medics or other personnel may be informed to the extent of injuries to the body so that they may provide medical assistance.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07660692&OS=07660692&RS=07660692
owner: United States of America
number: 07660692
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050616
---
The present application represents a National Stage application claiming priority of PCT US2005 021195 filed Jun. 16 2005 entitled Ballistic Impact Detection System which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 581 975 filed on Jun. 16 2004 and entitled Ballistic Impact Detection System BIDS 

The United States Government retains a royalty fee fully paid up non exclusive license to make use have made or have the invention used for governmental purposes.

The present invention is generally directed to ballistic impact detection systems. More particularly the invention is directed to a wearable ballistic impact detection system for detecting impacts to a body and especially impacts which might cause injury.

The future battlefield is projected to be asymmetric noncontiguous and nonlinear. To meet the challenge of future conflicts the U.S. Army is changing its paradigm from linear and sequential operations to simultaneous and distributed operations. Sophisticated and adaptive adversaries are making unconventional tactics such as guerrilla warfare and terrorist attacks commonplace. In the future as today ground forces will continue to be counted on to win hold the ground and rebuild the peace. The centerpiece enabler of the Army s transformation is the Future Force Warrior FFW . FFW is a revolutionary redesign of the individual warfighter platform from the skin out. FFW is a system wherein data from sensors on the individual soldier are fused with similar information from other soldiers in the unit of action. As the data is integrated and sent back the warfighter becomes a sensor node in a bigger network mesh which ultimately allows battlefield commanders to quickly react to critical information. Elements of the individual warfighters health status will be incorporated into the data stream from physiological monitoring devices worn by each soldier. The Warfighter Physiological Status Monitor WPSM is the medical system that will deliver pertinent information that will keep the soldier in the fight and in the event of becoming a combat casualty aid medics in rescue and recovery operations.

The central tenet to the Army s transformation to FFW is the ability to see first understand first act first and finish decisively. The underlying foundation for achieving this detect decide deliver goal of battlefield tactics will be information technology. Acquiring critical information and delivering it rapidly and correctly will have a profound effect on the tactical operational and strategic success of future combat missions. In the future the Army unit of action will conduct operations over larger spaces. This translates into small disparate fighting groups covering far more territory with a single medic in support. It is quite likely that FFW warfighters will be out of sight and hailing distance of medics and will rely on a medical information sub network to achieve adequate levels of medical support. Early notification of a soldier s need for medical attention can reduce the time to initial treatment and thus may reduce the morbidity and mortality of wounded soldiers.

Data from a study of causes of death from the Vietnam War shows that while 66 of combat casualties die within the first 5 minutes of being wounded there is an opportunity to save lives if a medic can get to a soldier quickly. shows the percentage of all combat deaths as a function of the time from the wounding event. A therapeutic window of opportunity exists for those soldiers killed in action KIA in the timeframes encompassing 5 minutes to 6 hours. Given findings during Operation Desert Storm that the predominant cause of deaths in Corps hospitals was exsanguinations from extremity wounds it is likely that with advances in body armor extremity wounds will become a large percentage of potentially salvageable casualties on the battlefield. Knowing when a wounding event occurs and the ability to engage other physiological apparatus on the soldier to determine the extent of the casualty will play an important role in the required remote triage capability needed to change battlefield casualty statistics.

One known way to detect penetrating impacts is to use a mesh fabric incorporating fiber optics. When a fiber is broken it is assumed to be caused by a penetrating impact. However such a system is fragile and cannot accurately determine a ballistic impact from a rip or tear in the fabric caused by other sources.

Regardless of potential solutions there exists a need in the art for a wearable ballistic impact detection system for detecting impacts to a body and especially impacts which might cause injury. The over arching goal of the Ballistic Impact Detection System BIDS and WPSM program is to increase survivability of the soldier on the battlefield and facilitate more rapid triage for the combat medic. The BIDS has the following advantages it is less expensive to manufacture it detects impacts in extremities is not prone to false positives from rips and tears and is able to detect non penetrating but injurious blast overpressure.

The Ballistic Impact Detection System BIDS comprises a means to detect when a human body is impacted by a potentially injurious impact such as a bullet shrapnel or a significant blast wave. Piezo film sensor elements detect the acoustic vibration patterns caused by an impact and convert them to a voltage. The voltage is passed through a circuit which determines if the impact has the frequency and amplitude characteristics of impacts that cause injuries. BIDS will be integrated into the Warfighter Physiological Status Monitor WPSM being developed for the Future Force Warrior FFW program. The WPSM represents the first attempt to place physiological monitoring equipment on individual soldiers. While the overall purpose of the WPSM is to provide information as to the health of the soldier it has two distinct modes operational and combat casualty. The BIDS will be used as the trigger mechanism to automatically detect a potentially injurious impact. This will enable the WPSM to begin monitoring physiological signals at faster rates in order to provide the medic with information enabling remote triage. This information is also of value to command and control elements.

Two sound sensors are positioned on a combatant s body to register high energy acoustic signatures produced by ballistic impacts. The voltage output from these sensors feeds a small battery powered analog and or digital circuit also carried by the combatant. The circuitry isolates these signatures according to their voltage amplitudes and frequencies and discerns the approximate impact locations on the body within right center and left general regions. The circuitry outputs off or on signals corresponding to each of these three general locations. The on outputs signifying a ballistic impact can ultimately be interfaced to a wireless link with a medical receiver in order to provide notification that the soldier has experienced one or more wounding events in these respective locations.

The BIDS is designed to detect ballistic impacts to the soldier s body. In future Army battle scenarios soldiers will be spread over a much larger battle zone. It is quite likely that the solder will be out of direct contact with medical personnel. BIDS will act as a trigger for other on body systems to collect physiological data at a faster rate. This data will then be radioed to the medic to allow remote triage.

Some of the novel features of this invention include the application of Piezo film sensors on the body that pick up skin vibrations detection and determination of frequencies associated with a ballistic impact determination of the location of ballistic impacts on the body determination of wound severity and detection of blast overpressure.

Ballistic impact detection could also prove valuable to police units firefighters and other personnel working in hazardous environments for wound detection. The BIDS can also be used to detect impact for machinery buildings and equipment and to sense vibrations for machinery. The BIDS can be built into body armor battle fatigue uniforms or other garments articles worn by an individual providing for an automatic call for help.

Additional objects features and advantages of the present invention will become more readily apparent from the following detailed description of a preferred embodiment when taken in conjunction with the drawings wherein like reference numerals refer to corresponding parts in the several views.

The BIDS design centers on reducing false positive indications to near zero. It would be approaching impossibility to completely rule out false positive indications due to the number of normal tests on all body types necessary. Because the BIDS is soldier born there are always requirements of near zero cube weight and power. An analog based system was designed based on the proof of concept data. Testing from the proof of concept phase indicates that discrimination is achieved by isolating frequencies in the 400 1000 Hertz band. If these frequencies meet a threshold voltage requirement an impact criterion is met. While high velocity swine tests corroborate the earlier proof of concept tests in terms of the frequency range of interest preferably a high pass filter is employed for the circuit.

The circuitry for BIDS is either purely digital in nature or an analog digital hybrid. In a preferred embodiment the circuitry is primarily analog with a digital output that is compatible with computing devices. The BIDS includes two sensors that couple to the body in such a way as to sense the vibrations of the skin. The sensors are Piezo film mounted on a flexible substrate of Mylar plastic. The vibrations produce voltages commensurate to the frequency and amplitude of the vibrations. Each sensor signal is processed in similar circuit sections. All sensor signals are ultimately fed into logic circuitry that makes a determination as to the location of the impact.

Turning now to there is shown the placement of sensors L and R on a human body connected to the various group of electronics which make up the Ballistic Impact Detection System. Of course in this case the body is shown from the rear so that L represents the left sensor and R represents the right sensor. It should be noted that although two sensors are shown here numerous different types and numbers of sensors could be used. The sensors L or the electronics may be mounted on a bullet proof vest body armor battle fatigues a uniform or other garments articles designed for the body. The electronics may include a transmitter to transmit information to a remote location. Such a transmitter is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6 349 201 which is incorporated herein by reference.

Turning now to there is shown left and right channels of electronics which lead to a logic circuit. The left channel starting with sensor L is shown in parallel with the right channel beginning with sensor R. Since both channels are correspondingly constructed only one channel needs to be discussed below. The voltage signal from sensor L is conducted to an input buffer amplifier L. The signal then passes through a high pass filter L. The current embodiment uses a 3 pole Bessel with a cutoff frequency of 5000 Hertz. While much of the work to date indicates that telltale frequencies exist in to 400 1000 Hertz range it is impossible to create an analog filter with such a narrow band pass. The 5000 Hertz filter is 42 dB down at 1000 Hertz and 60 dB down at 500 Hertz. It has been found that there is enough frequency information passed by this filter to adequately discriminate the impact signals collected. The signal is then conducted to a full wave rectifier L which converts the voltage from bipolar to only positive. The signal then passes through a 3 pole 1000 Hertz low pass filter L which widens the voltage peaks of interest. The signal is then conducted into a logarithmic amplifier L. The output of amplifier L is a voltage equal to the log of the input voltage. This stage at amplifier L prevents a large signal from saturating the next stages. Saturation would cause loss of frequency information that could lead to false positive impact determinations. The next stage is a peak hold circuit L which determines and conducts the peak voltage in the signal to the threshold circuit stage L. Threshold circuit stage L compares the peak voltage of the signal to a threshold voltage. If the signal voltage is higher than the threshold then an impact has occurred. The original signal voltage is passed to logic that determines location. This location logic compares the amplitudes of all the sensors to make a location determination.

Turning now to there is shown a sensor which could be either of sensors L or R described above. This particular sensor is a Piezoelectric film type sensor generally formed of a Piezoelectric polymer such as polyvinylidene floride PVDF . Such a sensor has a base layer preferably formed of approximately 14 mil thick Mylar and a top layer formed of approximately 7 mil thick Mylar. Between the two outer Mylar layers and there are formed in order a layer of approximately 1 16 thick foam which is located below Mylar layer a metal silver ink layer forming the negative terminal of sensor a PVDF layer and a positive silver ink layer . Although not shown each sensor L R preferably incorporates FET circuitry.

The negative silver ink layer and the positive silver ink layer are connected to output wires and by means of eyelet connectors and respectively. All of the layers mentioned above are preferably laminated together such as with an approximately 1 mil acrylic adhesive. The overall capacitance for such a sensor is preferably 550 Pico farads with a dissipation factor of less than 0.025. Sensors L and R could be constructed in other ways such as those shown in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 413 202 and 4 761 005 which are incorporated herein by reference.

Turning now to there is shown a more detailed diagram of the two channels shown in . However there are modifications and detailed below. In this case with reference to the left sensor L the signal is passed to a low pass filter L with a 20 kHz cutoff. Likewise right sensor R is connected to a low pass 20 kHz filter R. At this point it should be noted that low pass filters L and R are not crucial to the invention and need not be present. If provided both left and right filters L and R would be input to an analog to digital converter circuit as shown. With reference to the left channel the signal passes through 500 1000 Hz band pass filter L then to a root mean squared DC converter L and next to comparators L and L which checks the signal versus a reference voltage. Finally a search logic determines whether a hit is a left side hit a center hit or a right side hit. The right channel has similar circuitry which will not be described separately.

Turning now to there is shown a more detailed circuit diagram similar to that shown in . However this diagram includes both 1 kHz and 3 kHz band pass filters L R L R for each channel. These filters pass 500 100 Hz for the kHz filters L and R and pass 2000 4000 Hz for the 3 Hz filters L and R. The relative strength of the signal from each type of filter provides additional information regarding the impact.

Turning now to there is shown again left and right channels coming from left and right sensors L and R. The channels correspond to those shown in . In this case the low pass filters L and R again optionally shown are specified as UAF microchips and their pin configurations are shown with each pin connected to an appropriate electrical element to set each filter at the 20 kHz level. Next in each channel is shown another UAF microchip this time set to be a respective band pass filter L R. Again low pass filter L and R are optionally shown. If not provided the output from a respective sensor L R would be sent to pin of a respective band pass filter L R as represented by the dotted lines in . Next shown in each channel are AD microchips which act as rectifiers L and R of the block diagram shown in . Furthermore the pin configuration of four different comparators L L R and R are shown in . These comparators are equivalent to those shown in . Finally the details of the logic gates shown in are shown in much more detail in .

Although considered to be shown in sufficient detail in reference to the figures discussed above for the sake of completeness a further detailing of preferred circuitry will be briefly discussed with reference to and certain test results below. However at this point is should be understood that the particular circuitry employed could take various forms while still achieving the desired results. show the left channel of the BIDS circuit represented in . Note once again sensor L is connected to an input amplifier L which then sends a signal to high pass filter L which in turn sends a signal to full wave rectifier L. Next in the sequence is low pass filter L which connects to logarithmic unit L and next to peak hold circuit L. Likewise show the right hand channel of the BIDS circuit represented from . Sensor R is connected to input amp L which then sends a signal to high pass filter R which in turn sends a signal to full wave rectifier R. Next in the sequence is low pass filter R which connects to logarithmic unit R and next to peak hold circuit R. show the end of the channel shown beginning with A showing left and right threshold circuits L and R while B D show the logic circuitry . Finally presents a detailed view of the preferred circuitry for threshold circuit R.

Regardless of the particular circuitry employed the current two sensor embodiment if the amplitude signals from sensors L and R are less than a 2 1 ratio and at least one sensor signal meets the threshold voltage requirement the impact is deemed to have occurred between the sensors or in a center location. If the ratio of the signals is greater than 2 1 and the greater signal also meets the threshold voltage requirement the location is deemed to be distal to the sensor with the greater amplitude signal. Thus in the two sensor embodiment three locations are possible center right and left. The voltage signals for these location outputs are latched and then available to be read or transmitted to a computer. Once read the BIDS accepts a reset voltage signal which returns the location outputs to ground. In its current embodiment the BIDS circuitry can distinguish one impact in each location until a reset is received. The current analog BIDS circuit measures 1.5 square inches and requires approximately 600 microamperes of current at 3 volts.

A further aspect of BIDS is linking the impact detection with the wounding severity to provide the medic with as much triage information as possible. At this point it should be noted that the BIDS can be based on a digital signal processor which would sample the incoming analog voltage from the sensors establish Fast Fourier Transforms and perform power analysis on the signals to determine impacts and locations. Sophisticated algorithms could be established to tell from frequency analysis whether a bone has been struck and from power analysis whether an exit wound exists. In this digital embodiment BIDS would track multiple impacts in the same general location as well as potentially providing an indication of wounding severity.

In connection with the creation and testing of the Ballistic Impact Detection System BIDS of the invention hypothesis outlined that acoustic vibrations on the skin created by penetrating ballistic missiles could be sensed and analyzed to determine severity of the wounding event. A proof of concept phase was conducted with the acquisition of impact signatures from a swine model used in a non lethal wounding protocol. During this protocol a single plastic bullet a 12 mm steel bearing ball with a thin plastic coating weighing approximately 16 grams was fired from a gas gun at an anesthetized pig referenced as Test ID 65 4 from a distance of 8 feet. Three impact locations were used lateral chest sternum and abdomen. Velocities ranged from 239 to 298 feet second. Two Piezo film sensor elements were attached using duct tape to the back of the animal symmetrically about the spine just below the scapulas or symmetrically about the sternum. The voltage response from the sensor elements were digitized at 20 000 samples per second and digitally recorded. illustrates an impact to the left lateral chest for one test Test ID 65 4 . Analysis of the impact signatures showed consistent characteristics. Each waveform was made up of two distinct frequency patterns. The first pattern was a low amplitude high frequency section lasting on the order of 20 milliseconds. The second pattern was a high amplitude low frequency section. show exemplary voltage recordings.

For purposes of this disclosure we will refer to the high frequency section as the shock wave and the lower frequency section as the tissue displacement wave. shows the two frequency sections the shock wave as a fast moving slight rippling effect that moves outward from the impact site and the slower developing tissue displacement wave radiating outward tantamount to ripples in a pool. Examination of show that the shock wave amplitude of the left sensor L is greater than the amplitude of the right sensor R confirming that the impact site was the left lateral chest. Examination of the tissue displacement waves also confirms a left side hit. They also show that once formed they move rapidly as witnessed by the imperceptible delay of the tissue displacement waves between the sensors. Frequency analysis in the form of Fast Fourier Transforms FFT was performed on the waveforms. shows the FFT performed on the initial 7.5 milliseconds of the shock wave for Test ID 65 4. Peak frequencies in the range from 500 to 1000 Hertz were typical in all shots. The peak frequencies frequencies with the highest power in this range from this analysis are tabulated in Table 2. FFTs were also performed on the tissue displacement section of the waveform. In every case the predominant frequency of the tissue displacement wave was 98 Hz 19 Hz.

The similarity of the primary frequencies provided a proof of concept for ballistic impact detection. The primary frequency range 489 822 Hz of the impact signature is much higher than what is typically generated in the body during routine activity. Running jumping and even blunt thumps to the body elicit only a typical 100 Hertz tissue displacement frequency that was also seen in the ballistic signature analysis.

A multi protocol research plan was developed to compare impact signatures across models with those from humans. For this purpose a commercial paintball rifle was chosen to deliver standardized impacts. Paintballs offered a socially acceptable method of delivering an impact to human volunteers for comparison to similar swine and human cadaver impacts. It was thought that similarity of low velocity impact signatures with that of humans would build a strong case for the necessary high velocity impacts in that model. Four swine weighing from 48 to 75 kg were impacted in four locations each sternum lateral chest abdomen and hind leg with and without body armor while under anesthesia. Five paintballs were fired at each location for a total of forty shots per pig 4 locations 5 shots with body armor plus 4 locations 5 shots without body armor . Eight Piezo film sensors were attached to the pig s back in two columns of four symmetrical about the spine. The armor non armor portions of the testing were randomized as was the shot order in each portion. However all 20 shots were fired before changing into or out of the body armor. Similarly all five shots per position were fired before changing to a different impact location. The animals were fitted with older versions of aviation flak jackets for these tests. A total of 1280 impacts recordings were acquired 4 pigs 4 locations 2 body armor 5 shots 8 sensors . Analysis revealed that while impacts were discernable for almost every sensor and every shot many of the impact recordings were too low in amplitude and not similar to the non lethal impacts seen in the proof of concept work. Load cell analyses of the paintball impacts show forces that are 25 times less than the solid steel balls used in the non lethal phase. Calculated values for the non lethal projectiles range from 46 to 66 Joules at the velocities 250 300 ft sec used in the protocol. Paintball impacts can be calculated at 8 Joules using 3 grams and 250 ft sec . However this calculation does not consider the work expended as the paintball breaks upon impact. Paintball impacts were measured using a load cell at 2 Joules. It is suspected that the difference in the force of the impacts does not cause the characteristic impact signatures of the non lethal wounding studies. A typical lateral chest with armor signature is shown in . The signature in can be broken into three separate sections the pre impact section from 0 to 9 milliseconds the impact section from 9 to 12 milliseconds and the tissue displacement section from 12 milliseconds on. With no way of determining the actual time of impact of these recordings the pre impact section of the signatures is considered to represent the response from the air blast of the paintball rifle when fired. The impact section corresponds to the shock wave section in the non lethal wounding signatures. Due to the diminished force of impact of the paintball the impact section duration is shorter than the non lethal signatures. The diminished force of impact also causes the amplitudes of the tissue displacement wave to be much lower than the non lethal recordings. It should be noted that a plywood baffle was used in the non lethal wounding protocol to dissipate the air blast from the gun to prevent the chronographs from prematurely actuating. No indication of the air blast is evident in those recordings.

Signals from all sensors were digitally recorded at 50 000 samples per second on each channel with a 10 000 hertz anti aliasing filter. Analysis of the lateral chest shots of the pig both armor and non armor revealed that the predominant shock frequencies occurred in the range of 300 to 700 Hz. Fast Fourier Transforms were performed on the shock section of each signature. The first 120 points of the shock section was zero padded to 1024 points. The FFT returned 512 frequency coefficients over 25 000 Hertz range for a resolution of 48.8 Hertz per coefficient. The top two frequencies were recorded based on amplitude for each FFT. shows the FFT for the shock wave portion of the signal shown in . It was quite common to see the double peaks shown in . These peaks are considered to be harmonics.

Table 3 shows average sensor reading for five shots at a lateral chest location while wearing body armor. In the cases where there was no top frequency in the 300 1000 Hertz range the most significant peak in that range was selected and the amplitude noted.

The location of all lateral chest shots was on the right side approximately equal distance from two sensors. The snug fit of the body armor stabilizes the sensors and their response. To this end data recorded in connection with armored protection were more consistent than the unarmored data. Table 4 shows the results of the lateral chest shots with body armor comparable to the live animal impacts summarized in Table 3. Immediately noticeable in the cadaver impacts was the lack of analyzable signatures in channels and in some of the animals. These are the sensors on the far side non shot side . However overall the top frequencies are very comparable those of the live impacts. While the frequencies are remarkably similar the amplitude of the cadaver signals is dramatically lower across all four sensors. Signal strength in the live animals ranged from 160 to 230 except for sensor while signals in the cadavers were markedly lower the closest sensor registering an average of 65 and sensors and registering 26 and 24 respectively. Sensor is again understandable lower than the other sensors as it is the farthest from the shot in both scenarios.

Three human test subjects volunteered for the paintball impact testing. Each subject received eight impacts four with body armor and four without body armor. Subjects received impacts in the abdomen lateral chest with and without the armor and received two extremity shots one arm and one thigh wearing armor and then two more extremity shots opposite arm and opposite thigh while not wearing the armor. Sensors were placed on the back of the subjects and fixed with adhesive tape similar to the pigs as shown in . Subjects wore jacket style NATO body armor for this test.

In general numerous human impact locations were analyzed and FFT data from eight impact locations were computed. shows a representative left lateral chest impact with body armor signal from sensor . It should be noted that the small pre impact waves that were visible on the swine recordings are not visible in the human recordings. As previously stated these small waves are believed to be artifact from the air blast of the gun. Since the human subjects stand behind protective plywood it seems logical that the air blast is dissipated. The human impact signature in prevents shock and tissue deformation components corresponding to the swine recordings. shows the FFT performed on the impact shown in . FFT analysis on the shock portion of the recordings similar to those performed on the swine impact recordings for the lateral chest impacts are summarized in Table 5.

The frequencies noted in Table 5 represent the top frequency peaks. Overall to this point the peak frequencies of the human subject correlate well with the swine frequencies. The average frequency for the human lateral chest shots with body armor is 437.1 Hertz with a standard deviation of 78.6 n 22 . The average frequency for the swine lateral chest shots with body armor is 471.1 Hertz with a standard deviation of 122.0 n 90 .

Similarities between the low impact swine and low impact human signatures provided the needed impetus to perform high velocity swine impacts. A protocol was written to perform a limited number of shots using two caliber bullets 7.62 M80 ball and 5.56 M855 ball four locations sternum lateral chest abdomen and hind limb and three velocities 2800 ft sec 2300 ft sec and 1300 ft sec . The impact schedule is shown in Table 6. It was important to test a combination of threats facing the soldier today. Given that resources were limited certain tradeoffs were made. The velocities were chosen to reflect an AK47 muzzle velocity 2800 ft sec an approximate 200 yard rifle engagement 2300 ft sec and handgun velocity 1300 ft sec .

7.62 rounds are currently the most common small arms threat to US soldiers on the battlefield and are fired by various Soviet Block style weapons e.g. AK 47 RPK RPD etc. . The M855 round 5.56 mm is a standard NATO round and represents the trend of reducing the bullet caliber and total round weight to gain higher velocity and decrease soldier basic ammunition load weight. This smaller caliber provides information about smaller high velocity fragmentation munitions impacts e.g. howitzers mortars grenades etc . The chosen locations reflect the desire to maintain consistency with the low velocity protocols. However in this study body armor was used for all impacts. The targeted population for the BIDS is the frontline combat soldier. Projected warfighter designs call for body armor. It was important in the low velocity impact study to relate back to the proof of concept work originally done without body armor. Therefore low impact tests were conducted wearing body armor and without body armor. The high impact tests do not need to relate back to previous low impact tests since results from these high impact tests alone will be the basis for the BIDS circuitry. Interceptor body armor from Point Blank with SAPI and Gamma Plus ceramic plates were used for this study. Sternum shots were fired into the ceramic plates of the vest abdomen shots were fired into the Kevlar outer tactical vest just below the ceramic plates lateral chest shots were fired into the Kevlar outer tactical vest and hind limb shots were fired into the unprotected thigh of the animal. The ceramic plates which are rated to protect against 7.62 rounds at 2800 ft sec defeated all rounds at all velocities although permanent backface deformations of approximately 1 cm were created at the high velocities. The Kevlar outer tactical vest is rated to defeat handgun rounds however the high ogive of the rifle rounds allowed all rounds to penetrate the Kevlar. A pilot study was performed to determine if freshly euthanized animals could be used instead of live anesthetized animals. Lateral chest shots using 7.62 rounds at 2800 ft sec from six live anesthetized animals were compared to animals that were euthanized minutes before the impact. As in previous experiments eight sensors were placed equidistant about the spine in two columns of four. Unlike other experiments these tests employed six newly design Piezo film sensors as well as two of the older style bone conducting sensors. Unfortunately the new sensors were not as responsive as the older bone conducting ones and have been left out of the analysis. The results from these tests will be from signatures recorded from the two bone conducting sensors. show typical impact signatures from form the pilot study. The graph on the left is a 2800 ft sec 7.62 round left lateral chest impact from a live anesthetized animal. The graph on the right is the same parameters from a freshly euthanized animal.

Similarly show the frequency spectrum of the above impact signatures live in and freshly euthanized in . The FFTs below are 1024 point FFTs using 75 data points and zero padding. The Y axis is always in arbitrary units which can be compared between graphs in which similar processing has been performed. After completing the pilot study the remaining animals were impacted directly after euthanasia. It should be noted that the sensor used in these recordings has a particular resonance at 17 000 Hz explaining the large frequency response in that area on the graphs in . While there was some signal present in that frequency region care must be used in characterizing the frequency response of the sensors as it affects the analysis of the impact signatures.

Mine surrogates containing surrogates containing 100 and 200 grams of C4 explosive were used against cadavers with and without a blast suit. Sensors were affixed to the cadavers using superglue in the same configuration as . Signals were recorded at 50 000 samples per second on each channel. shows the impact signal from a 200 gram blast with a blast suit. The subject s nose was 55 centimeters measured radially from the center of the mine surrogate. The response from the sensor seems to be that of a second order system in response to a step function. A second order system consists of a mass a spring and a dashpot shock absorber . shows a longer duration event lasting well beyond 600 milliseconds. Examination of the recording indicates higher frequency components for the first 150 milliseconds and slower frequencies after 150 milliseconds. It is likely that part of the slower frequency waves are made up of the tissue deformation waves. An FFT on the first 170 milliseconds of the blast is shown in . Much of the response to this type of blast is in the lower frequencies less than 200 Hertz. This seems to indicate that the surface of the body couples with the primary low frequency blast wave.

Data was also acquired for simulated normal activity to determine key characteristics of signals from running hopping and a significant jolt. Human data was collected while the subject ran and hopped in place. The jolt signature resulted in a jump off a 30 inch table. is the resultant signal from the 30 inch jump. is the frequency domain spectrum produced by the FFT. The frequency spectrum shows that this jolt to the body produces two significant frequencies a larger amplitude component at 293 Hertz and a smaller but significant frequency at 586 Hertz. This latter frequency is in the range produced by the bullet impacts. Of the three normal recordings only the big jump proved to contain frequencies in the range of those produced by the bullet impacts.

Bench testing of the BIDS circuit included converting the digital impact signatures in analog voltages and feeding them through the circuit. The impact threshold settings were set so as to discriminate between the swine impacts and the normal human movement signatures. Setting the threshold is somewhat arbitrary since the voltage at that point is dependent upon the initial amplification from the input amplifier. More important is the relative voltage levels between the smallest detectable impact and the largest normal movement signal. shows a comparison of two signals that have been filtered using the 3 pole 5000 Hertz high pass filter in the BIDS circuit. The first trace 400 is the time domain signal from a hind limb 5.56 caliber impact at 1300 ft sec the second trace is the time domain signal from the big jump in . shows the ability to easily discriminate the weakest bullet impact recorded from the strongest normal activity recording.

Although described with reference to preferred embodiments of and tests conducted in connection with the invention it should be readily understood that various changes and or modifications could be made to the invention without departing from the spirit thereof. For example different types of signal processing circuitry for determining location of impacts or a target are shown in U.S. Pat. No. 4 349 728 which is incorporated herein by reference. Certainly other logic elements could be used in the BIDS system without departing from the scope of the invention. In general it is important that the sensor system of the invention can be used to detect verify and locate a ballistic impact on a body particularly an impact which causes an injury to the body. Detection and location information can be transmitted to a remote location with this information being potentially used to enhance the ability to appropriately respond to counter the injury. In any case the invention is only intended to be limited by the scope of the following claims.

