---

title: Methods and systems for area search using a plurality of unmanned vehicles
abstract: Disclosed are methods and systems that include a method for controlling movement of a first unmanned vehicle (UV) to search an area, where the method includes generating a first trace associated with prior positions in which the first UV has been located, determining a direction in which the first UV is to move using the first generated trace, and causing the first UV to move in the determined direction. The trace may be a numerical value that decreases as a function of the time that has elapsed since the first trace was generated. The methods and systems may also include receiving data relating to a second trace, and using that second trace to determine the direction. The second trace may be generated by a second UV. The second trace may be associated with a position within a predetermined radius from a position associated with the first UV.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08086351&OS=08086351&RS=08086351
owner: Icosystem Corporation
number: 08086351
owner_city: Cambridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050207
---
This application is related to and claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application Ser. No. 60 542 744 filed on Feb. 6 2004 and entitled Methods and Systems for Area Search Using a Plurality of Unmanned Vehicles the content of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

This invention was made by an agency of the United States Government or under contract with an agency of the United States Government. The name of the United States Government agency and the Government contract number are Air Force Research Laboratory contract number F33615 02 M 3232.

The disclosed methods and systems relate generally to control of an unmanned vehicle and more specifically control of a plurality of unmanned vehicles for searching an area containing stationary or moving targets.

Unmanned vehicles UVs are vehicles which may carry sensory computational and communications or other payloads but no on board human pilot. This can include unmanned ground vehicles UGVs unmanned air vehicles UAVs or unmanned underwater vehicles UUVs . Unmanned vehicles may be used to perform tasks in which the presence of a human pilot is undesirable or unfeasible. For example UVs can be used by military forces in combat scenarios in order to avoid or minimize human casualties.

One application of unmanned vehicles is in searching an area containing static or moving targets. This task requires that one or more unmanned vehicles carry a sensor able to detect the particular target being sought. To reduce search time and improve performance when the search area is large relative to the range of a single unmanned vehicle it may be desirable to deploy a plurality of unmanned vehicles that can carry out the search in a collaborative fashion.

Prior attempts to control a plurality of unmanned vehicles often have relied on predefined motion patterns such as commanding each unmanned vehicle to cover one particular portion of the search area. Such approaches tend to be brittle failure of a single unmanned vehicle may result in portions of the area remaining unsearched. Furthermore such control schemes may not adapt well to changing conditions such as the presence of moving targets or changes in the search area resulting from available intelligence. Additionally because such control schemes often have to be centralized i.e. the movement of the vehicles is controlled from a single location such approaches may lead to rapid increases in the communication bandwidth requirements and in the complexity of the controlling schemes.

The disclosed methods and systems employ trace based also referred to as pheromone based communications and control schemes to cause one or a plurality of unmanned vehicles to search for stationary or moving targets within a search area.

In one embodiment a plurality of unmanned vehicles may be equipped with sensors to detect stationary or moving targets a communication apparatus to exchange information with a ground station or other central command unit and an on board computer or processor able to store and retrieve data. The vehicles may be equipped with components such as e.g. weapons for use against the search targets or equipment to be delivered to the targets.

Each unmanned vehicle may communicate with the central command unit transmitting information regarding the portions of the search area it has searched since its last communication with the central command unit. The central command unit may collect such data from all unmanned vehicles storing it into a local map or database representing the search area. The trace transmitted by each unmanned vehicle is referred to as pheromone as it simulates the way in which insects and other animals may leave a chemical marker to indicate locations they have visited. The trace represents the area searched by the vehicle. The central command unit may transmit back to each unmanned vehicle data representing the distribution of traces in the unmanned vehicle s immediate surroundings. The unmanned vehicle may modify its flight path to move preferentially toward portions of the search area that are not covered or are less covered by pheromone from prior search activity.

The disclosed systems and methods may include a method for controlling movement of a first unmanned vehicle UV to search an area including generating a first trace associated with prior positions in which the first UV has been located determining a direction in which the first UV is to move using the first generated trace and causing the first UV to move in the determined direction.

In some embodiments determining the direction may include establishing a new position toward which the first UV is to move. Causing the first UV to move may include causing the first UV to move toward the new position. In some embodiments the disclosed method may include receiving data relating to a second trace. Determining the direction may include using the second trace. The second trace may be generated by a second UV. The second trace may be associated with a position within a predetermined radius from a position associated with the first UV.

In some embodiments the first trace may include information regarding spatial coordinates of the UV time at which the first trace was generated and or the identity of the UV. The first trace may also represent conditions at the associated prior positions. Such conditions may include detected threats and or detected targets.

In some embodiments the method may include generating an additional trace associated with additional positions. The additional trace may indicate that the additional positions have been searched. In some embodiments the first trace is a time varying digital signal. The digital signal may include a numerical value that decreases as a function of the time that has elapsed since the first trace was generated.

In some embodiments determining the direction may include identifying an unsearched position that is not associated with any trace. Determining the direction may also include identifying a position associated with one or more traces which indicate that that position was not searched by a UV for a pre determined period of time. Determining the direction may be further based on a decentralized control strategy which may include for example baseline strategy random strategy repulsion strategy and or global strategy. Determining the direction may further be based on responding to a request from a second UV to join that UV.

In some embodiments the disclosed systems and methods may include transmitting the generated trace to a central operator. Data relating to the second trace may thus be received from the central operator. The disclosed systems and methods may also include attacking a target found in the search tracking the target and or assessing the condition of the target.

In some embodiments the disclosed unmanned vehicle may be an airborne vehicle and may include a propulsion mechanism having independent pitch and yaw control that enables the UV to move in the area at variable speed a detector to detect targets a positioning device to determine that spatial position of the UV a communications module for transmitting information associated with the generated trace and for receiving data corresponding to the traces generated by at least one other UV and or a processor unit to determine the direction of the UV.

Also disclosed is a method for controlling movement of a plurality of unmanned vehicles UVs to search an area. The method may include generating traces associated with at least some of the UVs where each of the traces is associated with prior positions at which the corresponding UV has been located transmitting to at least some of the UVs data associated with at least some of the generated traces associated with other UVs determining a direction in which the corresponding UV is to move using at least some of the transmitted data and the trace associated with that UV and causing that UV to move in the corresponding determined direction.

Also disclosed is a system for controlling movement of a first unmanned vehicle UV to search an area that includes a trace generator for generating a first trace associated with prior positions in which the first UV has been located and a navigation module for determining a direction in which the first UV is to move using the first generated trace and for causing the first UV to move in the determined direction.

Further disclosed is a system for searching an area that includes a plurality of unmanned vehicles UVs where each of the UVs includes a trace generator for generating traces associated with the corresponding UV each of the traces associated with prior positions at which that corresponding UV has been located communications transmitter for transmitting some of the UVs data associated with at least some of the generated traces that are associated with the UV and receiving data associated with at least some of the generated traces associated with the UVs and a navigation module for determining a direction in which the corresponding UV is to move using at least some of the transmitted data and the traces associated with that UV and for causing that UV to move in the corresponding determined direction.

To provide an overall understanding certain illustrative embodiments will now be described however it will be understood by one of ordinary skill in the art that the systems and methods described herein can be adapted and modified to provide systems and methods for other suitable applications and that other additions and modifications can be made without departing from the scope of the systems and methods described herein.

Unless otherwise specified the illustrated embodiments can be understood as providing exemplary features of varying detail and therefore unless otherwise specified features components modules and or aspects of the illustrations can be otherwise combined separated interchanged and or rearranged without departing from the disclosed systems or methods. Additionally the shapes and sizes of components are also exemplary and unless otherwise specified can be altered without affecting the disclosed systems or methods.

As shown in the UAVs may be used to search the area to survey the terrain detect targets such as target attack detected targets or perform any other type of mission either alone or in coordinated collaboration with other UAVs deployed over the searched area. As will be well understood by those versed in the art UAVs such as those shown in may comprise the following components 

As can be seen in each of the UAVs may also be equipped with a trace generator module As will become apparent below a trace generator module may generate traces also referred to as pheromones that indicate that the positions associated with the traces had been visited and thus searched. Additionally the trace generator module may also generate traces associated with positions within the area covered by the various on board sensors of the UAV. Because different on board sensors may have different search characteristics they may generate different traces. The traces generated by the UAV as well as data received by the UAV regarding traces generated by other UAVs may be used to determine the UAV s future course. In other words every UAV may use the trace information among other things to independently determine the path that the UAV will follow as it explores alone or in collaboration with other UAVs the area in which the UAV is deployed. The UAVs thus may use the generated trace s to mark the territory in a somewhat analogous manner to the way insects mark their territory with pheromones so that the UAVs may subsequently utilize these markers to at least partly determine the direction that they are to follow in carrying out a future search.

Each of the trace generator modules may be coupled to the array of sensors placed on board the UAVs including for example the GPS sensor the target detector and UAV sensors described herein as well as any other sensors that may be placed on the UAVs. The trace generator modules may receive signals and data from the various sensors to which they are coupled and process the signals and data to generate traces associated with the UAVs current positions and or with positions inside the areas covered by the sensors. The trace generator module may be a special purpose device or it may be a type of processor based device suitable for multiple applications and comprising volatile and non volatile memory elements peripheral devices to enable input output functionality including for example a CD ROM drive and or floppy drive or a network connection for downloading software containing computer instructions to enable general operation of the trace generator module as described herein and for downloading software implementation of a trace generating program. Such a processor based device may be dedicated exclusively to trace generation or may also be utilized to carry out other functions as well. Each of the trace generator modules may also comprise additional control circuitry modules and or other components that may be required for implementation of the modules as described herein. As will further be appreciated by the person skilled in the art the trace generators may be one of many commercially available computer systems that may adapted to be housed in unmanned air vehicles such as the UAVs 

Generated traces may not only indicate that their associated positions have been searched but may also be representative of the attributes and conditions at those positions. The attributes and conditions represented by the generated traces may include for example the spatial coordinates of the positions the time at which the traces were generated the identity of the UAVs that generated the respective traces detected threats including for example other UAVs that are deemed to be situated too closely to the UAV generating the trace detected targets in the area the lighting conditions the weather or cloud cover in the area and the characteristics of the sensor s generating the trace. Those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the generated traces may be further representative of other types of conditions and attributes present at or around the position at which the corresponding UAV is located.

In one embodiment the traces generated by the various trace generator modules may comprise digital signals that encode the information captured by each UAV s sensors. The individual trace generator modules may for example combine the outputs of the various on board sensors to produce composite values or metrics that represent the attributes and conditions at the associated positions and indicate for example that the positions had been searched. Thus for example the trace generator may generate a particular value if it the target detector on board the UAV detected three targets within the vicinity of the UAV and would produce a different value which may be higher or lower if only a single target is detected. Additionally in some embodiments the generated traces may vary over time. For example the generated trace may decrease in value over time to emulate the evaporative properties of biological pheromones. As will become apparent below time varying trace signals may be useful in situations where the positions in the searched area have to be re visited to determine whether targets attempting to evade detection by the cluster of UAVs have moved to those positions that have already been visited by one or more of the UAVs. Thus time varying trace signals reflect the fact that conditions at particular positions may become unknown over time notwithstanding the fact that those particular positions had been previously visited.

As also shown in each UAV may also include a communications module capable for example of transmitting traces generated by the corresponding UAV and receiving data corresponding or relating to traces produced by other UAVs either directly from the other UAVs or from a central operator that collects trace data from UAVs deployed in the area and relays that data or a processed version thereof to other UAVs. As will be appreciated the communications modules may be any known transmitter receiver apparatus and may include communications devices operating at any operable frequency band e.g. radio frequency microwave frequency optical bands etc. that those of ordinary skill may be familiar with. Additionally transmission of the trace signals may be performed using any known coding and or modulation technique. Likewise reception of traces and or corresponding data may be performed using corresponding demodulation and or decoding techniques.

Thus the communications modules enable each UAV to emit its traces so that other UAVs would be able to sense them and to thereby determine their motion path based at least partly on the sensed traces. Each communications module may therefore broadcast the traces generated by the corresponding UAV to other UAVs in the cluster. Alternatively or in addition each communications module may transmit the traces to the central operator .

Central operator may comprise any conventional communications and or data processing apparatus capable of receiving traces sent by UAVs and decoding them. Such communications apparatus may likewise be capable of transmitting data to among others UAVs deployed in the area after performing any appropriate pre transmission signal processing including for example signal encoding and modulation. Central operator may further comprise a processing module not shown for processing the trace information received from the UAVs. As such the processing module of central operator may be for example a special purpose device or it may be a processor based device suitable for multiple applications and comprising volatile and non volatile memory elements peripheral devices to enable input output functionality including at least one peripheral device such as a CD ROM drive and or floppy drive or network connection for downloading software containing computer instructions to enable general operation of the central operator as described herein and for downloading software implementation of a central operator program. Such a processor based device may be dedicated exclusively to trace information processing or may also be used to carry out other functions as well. The processing module of the central operator may also comprise additional required control circuitry modules and or other components that may be needed for implementation of the processing module. As will further be appreciated by those skilled in the art such a processing module may be one of many commercially available computer systems and may be configured as a stand alone workstation or as a node or a server in a local or wide area network partly or wholly responsible for processing the data received from UAVs. It will also be appreciated that although the central operator is shown in as being located in area the actual location of the central operator may be outside the area and that in fact the central operator may be housed on a mobile platform such as for example one of the UAVs deployed in the area.

The central operator may collect information from one some or all of the UAVs deployed in the area . As shown in the central operator may receive for example transmissions and from UAV and respectively. The information received which may include for example traces generated by trace generator modules and may be stored on the processing module of the central operator as a matrix wherein each cell in the matrix may correspond to a position in the searched area. Alternatively multiple cells may be utilized to represent one position with each cell storing one characteristic of the position. The information stored in the matrix may be the actual transmitted traces or may be a numerical value or values computed from the traces transmitted by the UAVs. The information stored in the matrix may indicate which positions in the searched area have been visited and may further represent the attributes and conditions at the positions associated with the traces.

On a regular basis or whenever communication is possible the central operator may transmit data back to one some or all of the UAVs deployed in area . For example as shown in the central operator may transmit data message to UAV and data message to UAV In one embodiment UAVs may receive from the central operator information about the area immediately surrounding the UAV at its current location. For example if the UAV is currently located at position x y within the search area the central operator may send a small matrix of information representing the amount of coverage for all cells whose coordinates are within a fixed distance i.e. some pre determined radius of the x y coordinates of the UAV. Alternatively in another embodiment the central operation may send to the UAVs data regarding not only the amount of coverage of positions within the entire searched area but also information regarding additional attributes and conditions at those positions that may be relevant for the determination of the path the respective UAVs are to follow e.g. information about threats locations of targets etc. .

The amount of data transmitted to each UAV may be adjusted as a function of 1 available communications bandwidth 2 time since the last communication with a particular UAV 3 speed of the UAV and other factors that impact the amount of information required by the UAVs.

As noted each UAV may receive data including for example data corresponding to traces generated by at least one other UAV and may use the data to influence its movement. In one example each UAV may consider all cells or locations within a small area around its current location. In another example each UAV may receive all the data maintained by the central operator and may use that information to determine a general direction represented for example as a vector or to determine a second position to which the UAV should move. Each UAV may also use its own generated trace data to determine the path e.g. the flight path that it is to follow. It will be understood that these direction determinations computations may be re performed by the UAVs at regular time intervals and or after the UAVs have advanced or moved a predetermined distance in the previously determined directions.

Determination of the direction that each UAV is to follow e.g. determining a second position to which the UAV should move from its current location may be performed for example by a navigation module not shown that may also be implemented as a special purpose or processor based device comprising volatile and non volatile memory elements peripheral devices and other control circuitry. The navigation module may form part of either the trace generator module or the communications module or may be a separate processor based module. The navigation module of a particular UAV may be coupled directly or indirectly to the UAV s propulsion and control or mechanism and may thus control the UAV s movement within the area .

In determining the path the UAV is to follow in one embodiment each UAV or more particularly the respective navigation module may use the received data as well as the traces generated by that UAV to identify those positions either within a pre determined radius from the coordinates of the UAV or within the entire area that have the least amount of coverage or that for other reasons such as the expected locations of many targets or high value targets may represent the most fruitful future search for it. For example if a high numerical value of a trace indicates that the associated position had been visited by some UAV or that the sensors on board that UAV had covered that position then the navigation module may direct the UAV to move toward other positions associated with traces having lower numerical values since those positions are represented as not having been searched or not having been adequately searched. In addition in a further elaboration of the scheme the module may take into account the availability of other UAVs to search a given area.

A different scheme for determining the movement of UAVs may utilize a global search strategy. Under that scheme the area may be divided into for example an N N grid where each cell in the grid may correspond to a sector of the area . The navigation module of a particular UAV may then monitor the UAV coverage inside every sector by for example calculating a value for each sector based on the number and values of traces inside the respective sector the number of UAVs in the sector and whether other UAVs are heading for the sector being monitored. The computed value for each sector being considered by the particular UAV may then be compared to the computed value for the sector in which the particular UAV is currently located. Such a comparison may for example be performed by calculating the difference between the two values. If the computed difference exceeds a threshold value the particular UAV may leave its current sector to proceed toward the sector in respect of which the difference value was computed. The global search strategy may be combined for example with a simpler local trace based strategy such that a UAV may use the global strategy to determine what sector to search and once located inside that sector may use another trace based strategies such as those described herein to identify and search positions that have not been searched or have not been adequately searched within the sector.

In another scheme a UAV may mathematically combine or process the spatial coordinates of positions not associated with a trace such as by averaging them and thereby compute a vector that indicates the direction to which the UAV should move.

It will be understood by those versed in the art that the determination of the direction or path a UAV is to follow i.e. what positions within the area it is to visit may be made based upon the underlying trace information using many different criteria and schemes of varying complexity and sophistication.

Additionally the movement of one some or all of the UAVs may be based in whole or in part on decentralized control strategies i.e. where each UAV independently controls its motion without an external agent or module controlling the movement of that UAV used in conjunction with the trace based i.e. pheromone based strategies described herein. Thus while control of UAV motion may still be based on the movement of UAVs toward positions in the area that have not been adequately searched by the cluster of UAVs as determined by the various schemes described herein that use the values of traces associated with those positions to identify positions not adequately covered additional movement strategies based on simple rules may be used to facilitate a more effective coverage of the area by the UAVs For example some of these decentralized control strategies may include 

In some embodiments UAVs may be deployed to detect and or attack targets in area in addition to searching for them. In those embodiments therefore the movement of UAVs may be affected by additional motion control strategies or rules that are intended to facilitate the UAVs missions to detect and destroy targets. For example since the targets that UAVs seek may be moving targets that may attempt to evade detection by for example moving into positions that have been already visited by UAVs it may be useful for the UAVs to return to areas already searched in order to determine if there have been changes in those positions. This may also be useful in searching for mobile targets globally even if destroying them is not an objective. Accordingly in some embodiments the trace generator modules may generate time varying traces i.e. pheromones that decrease in value over time. The time dependent decrease of the traces values may reflect the fact that after a certain amount of time has passed since the associated position has been visited by a UAV that position may be searched again to determine if a target has moved into that position or the position s surrounding area in the interim. Thus for example each of the traces generated by the UAVs deployed may include a time stamp. Subsequently the central operator and or the UAVs that receive data from the central operator may process the traces to cause their values to vary as a function of the time that has elapsed since the trace was generated as indicated by the time stamp . As the values of traces continue to vary over time the trace based strategies used by the UAVs will gradually start to favor those positions associated with the older traces thereby causing the UAVs to be directed toward those positions again.

Furthermore to detect and destroy targets or merely to detect them or interact with them in another way the UAVs may be required to enter into states i.e. modes in which additional movement control rules are used. For example the UAVs may enter the Join state where one UAV joins another UAV that had recruited it. In this state the recruiting UAV may for example send a signal to at least one other UAV or may send the signal via the central operator that provides the at least one other UAV with the first UAV s coordinates and requests that the at least one other UAV join it for seeking out and destroying a target s .

In yet another example the UAV may enter the Track state in which a particular UAV detects a target and subsequently begins tracking that target. In this situation control of the UAV s movement is governed at least to some extent by the position of a detected target or targets.

In a further example each UAV may enter an Assess Damage state in which a UAV detects a target and thereafter attempts to determine the status and or condition of the target e.g. has the target already been destroyed . This state is similar to the Track state.

In yet another example each UAV may enter an Attack state in which a UAV seeks to destroy its current target.

It will be understood by those of ordinary skill that other states or modes each having its own movement control rules may be used.

In operation a swarm of UAVs may be deployed in an area . Each of the UAVs may be equipped with one or more of sensors including for example a GPS sensor or sensors to determine the UAV s spatial coordinates a target sensor or sensors for detecting targets within the searched area and a UAV sensor or sensors to determine if there are other UAVs in the surrounding area of a particular UAV. Additionally each UAV may be equipped with a pheromone sensor or trace sensor which receives traces generated by other UAVs and uses those traces and traces individually generated by the particular UAV to determine the direction in which the particular UAV should proceed. Such a pheromone or trace sensor may be a receiver adapted to receive electromagnetic transmissions sent by the deployed UAVs. The communications module of system shown in may be used to receive traces generated by UAVs and thus act as a pheromone sensor .

Each UAV may employ its various on board sensors to search the area for targets such as target or simply to survey the characteristics of the area e.g. the area s topography . As each UAV searches the area it may generate a trace often referred to as pheromone to indicate that the particular position where the UAV is currently located had been searched. Such a trace may be a simple digital message represented as a numerical value. Further since the sensors employed by UAVs may be capable of covering or sweeping an area that extends beyond the current position of a UAV the UAV may generate a plurality of traces associated with positions covered by the UAV s respective sensors. Traces generated for those positions covered by the sensors although not actually visited by the UAV may be assigned different values than the values assigned for positions actually visited by the UAV. In addition generated traces may also hold data representative of attributes and conditions at the positions visited by the UAV or positions covered by the UAV s sensors. In situations where the UAV searches the area for moving targets traces may be configured to have evaporative characteristics such that the traces may vary over time e.g. have their values decreased . Such time dependent behavior may reduce the likelihood that multiple UAVs will fly over the same position within a short time window but may leave open the possibility that a particular portion of the search area will be searched more than once to avoid the possibility that moving targets will attempt to evade detection by hiding in places where UAVs already have searched. Traces may be generated for example by trace generator modules such as modules shown in .

Generated traces may be transmitted by the communications modules of the respective UAVs In one example the communications module which as previously described may be any conventional transmitter receiver apparatus capable of transmitting wireless communications or in some circumstances wired communications may broadcast the traces so that all UAVs deployed in the area may receive the broadcast traces. Alternatively in another example the communications modules may transmit generated traces to a central operator . The central operator may process and store the received traces. For example received traces or the data extracted from them may be stored in a matrix like data structure in which data is stored in cells that correspond to the positions associated with the received traces.

The central operator may at regular intervals or otherwise when UAVs are available to safely receive data send data corresponding to the data stored at the central operator . The central operator may send copies of the actual traces it received or otherwise send processed data to enable the UAVs receiving that data to individually and independently determine the course or path that they are to follow in searching the area . The volume of data sent to the UAV may depend on such factors as the transmission bandwidth available security considerations i.e. if complex encryption processing is required it may be necessary to send less data . Furthermore the central operator may transmit to each UAV only data pertaining to that UAV s immediate surrounding.

A UAV receiving data from either the central operator or from one or more of the other UAVs may then determine the direction in which or the next position to which it should move based on at least one of the received data and trace information that that UAV itself generated. In one example the UAV may determine what positions within a pre determined radius do not have a trace associated with them and or what positions have not been adequately covered for instance those positions that lie on the fringes of areas covered by the UAV s sensors . The UAV may also for example mathematically combine or process the spatial coordinates of positions not associated with a trace such as by averaging them and thereby compute a vector that indicates the direction to which the UAV should move.

Many other different techniques and schemes for determining a path for the UAV are possible. Additionally control of the UAV s movement may also be influenced by using other control strategies to govern the direction and or position to which the UAV should move including for example a baseline strategy a global strategy and or random strategy. Further the UAV may collaborate with other UAVs when the UAVs are deployed to seek out and or destroy targets and may thus enter into states e.g. Track Join Attack in which control of the UAV movement may be governed in whole or in part by other schemes that are not based on traces.

Once the UAV determines a direction in which and or the next position toward which it should move the navigation module directly or indirectly may control the UAV s propulsion and or control mechanism to cause it to move in the desired direction or toward the next position.

To test the efficacy of trace based strategies in comparison to other decentralized control strategies a simulator capable of simulating the performance of UAV clusters was developed. shows a screenshot of the UAV cluster simulator that was developed. The simulator was written in the Java language and control of the parameters that were used in the simulation such as the aspects of the terrain trace characteristics UAVs and targets was done through the use of command line instructions GUI widgets and built in variables. As can be seen in the simulator screen is divided into three areas. The top left area includes various widgets to control aspects of the simulation in real time such as pausing and restarting shuffling targets randomly or modifying the dynamics of the UAVs. The bottom area is a 3D view showing the boundaries of the terrain being searched the black wireframe box . The UAVs are represented by circles the triangles represent the UAVs sensor coverage area and the small dark spots at the lower part of the wireframe box are the targets. As can also be seen in the altitude of the UAVs can be visualized through the vertical lines connecting the UAVs to the ground. Shown in the top right area of is a top down matrix representation of the terrain which shows the grid used to determine coverage and the location of UAVs and targets. The traces may be represented as blocks of varying intensity.

As shows the trace based scheme implemented performed more efficiently in terms of coverage per UAV than the baseline approach that was tested. Particularly as can be seen the coverage efficiency i.e. the percentage of the area covered by the UAV during the simulation run when the above described trace based scheme was used with a single UAV was about 8.7 as compared to a coverage efficiency of about 7.6 when the baseline approach was used. Similarly when ten 10 UAVs were used for the trace based scheme the coverage efficiency per UAV was about 6 as compared to a coverage efficiency of about 4.4 with the baseline approach. It is to be noted that generally for all control strategies there is a reduction in the coverage efficiency per UAV with larger swarms although the total area covered increases as the size of the UAV swarm increases. The results of thus show that trace based or pheromone control strategies push UAVs to search the area in a pattern that leaves less unexplored space.

Thus the simulation results of show that trace based strategies in which UAVs use traces i.e. pheromones to determine positions that have been previously searched and direct the UAVs accordingly may be more efficient than other decentralized strategies for controlling the motion of UAVs.

The methods and systems described herein may offer numerous advantages over alternative search methods 

Although the methods and systems have been described relative to specific embodiments thereof they are not so limited. Obviously many modifications and variations may become apparent in light of the above teachings. For instance the same approach could be used for unmanned ground vehicles UGVs or unmanned underwater vehicles UUVs different sensor types could be employed for target detection including but not limited to vision radar magnetic ultrasonic infrared or others the format and amount of data stored by the central operator can vary and the communications systems can be effected through radio satellite visual line of sight or other systems.

The methods and systems described herein are not limited to a particular hardware or software configuration and may find applicability in many computing or processing environments. The methods and systems can be implemented in hardware or software or a combination of hardware and software. The methods and systems can be implemented in one or more computer programs where a computer program can be understood to include one or more processor executable instructions. The computer program s can execute on one or more programmable processors and can be stored on one or more storage medium readable by the processor including volatile and non volatile memory and or storage elements one or more input devices and or one or more output devices. The processor thus can access one or more input devices to obtain input data and can access one or more output devices to communicate output data. The input and or output devices can include one or more of the following Random Access Memory RAM Redundant Array of Independent Disks RAID floppy drive CD DVD magnetic disk internal hard drive external hard drive memory stick or other storage device capable of being accessed by a processor as provided herein where such aforementioned examples are not exhaustive and are for illustration and not limitation.

The computer program s can be implemented using one or more high level procedural or object oriented programming languages to communicate with a computer system however the program s can be implemented in assembly or machine language if desired. The language can be compiled or interpreted.

As provided herein the processor s can thus be embedded in one or more devices that can be operated independently or together in a networked environment where the network can include for example a Local Area Network LAN wide area network WAN and or can include an intranet and or the internet and or another network. The network s can be wired or wireless or a combination thereof and can use one or more communications protocols to facilitate communications between the different processors. The processors can be configured for distributed processing and can utilize in some embodiments a client server model as needed. Accordingly the methods and systems can utilize multiple processors and or processor devices and the processor instructions can be divided amongst such single or multiple processor devices.

The device s or computer systems that integrate with the processor s can include for example a personal computer s workstation personal digital assistant PDA handheld device such as cellular telephone laptop handheld or another device capable of being integrated with a processor s that can operate as provided herein. Accordingly the devices provided herein are not exhaustive and are provided for illustration and not limitation.

References to a microprocessor and a processor or the microprocessor and the processor can be understood to include one or more microprocessors that can communicate in a stand alone and or a distributed environment s and can thus can be configured to communicate via wired or wireless communications with other processors where such one or more processor can be configured to operate on one or more processor controlled devices that can be similar or different devices. Use of such microprocessor or processor terminology can thus also be understood to include a central processing unit an arithmetic logic unit an application specific integrated circuit IC and or a task engine with such examples provided for illustration and not limitation.

Furthermore references to memory unless otherwise specified can include one or more processor readable and accessible memory elements and or components that can be internal to the processor controlled device external to the processor controlled device and or can be accessed via a wired or wireless network using a variety of communications protocols and unless otherwise specified can be arranged to include a combination of external and internal memory devices where such memory can be contiguous and or partitioned based on the application. Accordingly references to a database can be understood to include one or more memory associations where such references can include commercially available database products and also proprietary databases and may also include other structures for associating memory such as links queues graphs trees with such structures provided for illustration and not limitation.

References to a network unless provided otherwise can include one or more intranets and or the internet. References herein to microprocessor instructions or microprocessor executable instructions in accordance with the above can be understood to include programmable hardware.

Unless otherwise stated use of the word substantially can be construed to include a precise relationship condition arrangement orientation and or other characteristic and deviations thereof as understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to the extent that such deviations do not materially affect the disclosed methods and systems.

Throughout the entirety of the present disclosure use of the articles a or an to modify a noun can be understood to be used for convenience and to include one or more than one of the modified noun unless otherwise specifically stated.

Elements components modules and or parts thereof that are described and or otherwise portrayed through the figures to communicate with be associated with and or be based on something else can be understood to so communicate be associated with and or be based on in a direct and or indirect manner unless otherwise stipulated herein.

Many additional changes in the details materials and arrangement of parts herein described and illustrated can be made by those skilled in the art.

