---

title: Conductive film
abstract: A conductive film has transparency and a high level of electrical conductivity, which is used for an electromagnetic interference film hardly causing a moiré phenomenon, and the like. To achieve the above-mentioned aim, the following disclosure is disclosed. A conductive film in which a conductive portion of a random network structure is present on at least one surface of a base film, a line width of the conductive portion composing the network structure is 30 μm or less, an area of portions where the conductive portion is not present is 50% or more with respect to an area of the conductive film, and an average of ratios of a major axis length to a minor axis length of an area surrounded by the network of the conductive portion, in which the base film is exposed, is larger than 1 and is equal to or less than 3.5.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07626128&OS=07626128&RS=07626128
owner: Toray Industries, Inc.
number: 07626128
owner_city: 
owner_country: JP
publication_date: 20051006
---
This is a 371 of PCT JP2005 018509 with an international filing date of Oct. 6 2005 WO 2006 040989 A1 published Apr. 20 2006 which is based on Japanese Patent Application No. 2004 296051 filed Oct. 8 2004.

This disclosure relates to a conductive film which is suitable for an electromagnetic interference film capable of being used for flat panel displays such as a plasma display panel and a liquid crystal television.

Generally a variety of electromagnetic waves are emitted from electronic equipment including household electrical appliances mobile phones personal computers and televisions. A strong electromagnetic wave is also emitted from flat panel displays such as a plasma display panel and a liquid crystal television among significantly increasing digital household electrical appliances and its influence on the human health is also concerned. People observe the images of such displays within a distance relatively close to these displays and for long time in some cases. By doing so an electromagnetic interference film suppressing these electromagnetic waves is required and the development thereof has been intensively investigated.

In electromagnetic interference films known at present various methods for suppressing these electromagnetic waves are adopted. For example a method in which copper foil is bonded to a polyester film a regular mesh shape is patterned by photolithography and etching is performed in such a way that the copper foil becomes a network configuration to prepare a conductive film in which a conductive portion is made from copper and has a network structure is disclosed in Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 2001 210988 page 1 claims etc. .

As another method a method of fabricating a conductive film by printing a composition containing a nucleic agent for plating such as palladium on a film such as polyester in a regular form of network by a printing method and further by applying nonelectrolytic copper plating to a layer consisting of the composition in the form of network is disclosed in Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 2002 185184 page 1 claims etc .

As further method a method of fabricating a conductive film by bonding a knit of metal fiber woven in length and width onto a polyester film or the like is disclosed in Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 11 119672 page 1 claims etc. .

Further a conductive body in the form of network which is obtained by initiating micro cracks in the random form of network and by filling the micro cracks with a conductive material is disclosed in Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 2004 228057 page 1 claims etc. a transparent conductive film provided with a layer in which metal fine particles coagulate in the random form of network is disclosed in Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 2003 71976 page 1 claims etc. transparent conductive film provided with a layer containing silver colloidal particles is disclosed in Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 2001 60416 page 1 claims etc. and a transparent conductive layer having a fine network structure using silver is disclosed in Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 10 312715 page 1 claims etc. .

A method for etching copper foil is an excellent method for attaining a highly precise network structure but it is generally low in yields in the steps of bonding copper foil photolithography and etching and consequently the yield of a final product becomes low. Further since a hazardous waste fluid is produced in the etching step safety and environmental precautions are required. Further when the copper foil is used as a material there is also a problem that much of the copper foil is eluted through etching to generate a waste fluid and therefore an amount of a material to be recovered is large.

A method of producing a conductive film by a nonelectrolytic plating process has a feature that an amount of metal waste fluid to be treated is small since metal is used for only required portion. But since it is difficult to form a pattern of more fine line in the step of printing a mesh form which is a first step it is consequently difficult to obtain a conductive film having a conductive portion of a fine line.

A method of bonding metal fiber is a very simple method and readily attains the effect of shielding an electromagnetic wave but it has a problem that it is difficult to make the network of a conductive portion fine.

The other large problem in technologies described above is a moir phenomenon occurring when the conductive film is used as an electromagnetic interference film at the surface of a display. The moir phenomenon is a phenomenon of a fleck pattern in stripe form generated when patterns in which dots or lines are geometrically regularly distributed are superimposed. As for the flat panel display a moir in stripe form tends to arise on a screen. This moir phenomenon arises by an interaction between the pattern of display devices of respective RGB colors of a display main body and the regular configuration of the network of the electromagnetic interference film placed in front of the display main body. These are arrayed regularly to each other and particularly the display device cannot be changed from a regular configuration to an irregular configuration.

It could be helpful to provide an excellent conductive film which is easy to produce and hardly causes a moir phenomenon when it is applied to flat panel displays as an electromagnetic interference film.

 1 A conductive film in which a conductive portion of a random network structure is present on at least one surface of a base film a line width of the conductive portion composing the network structure is 30 m or less an area of portions where the conductive portion is not present is 50 or more with respect to an area of the conductive film and an average of ratios of a major axis length to a minor axis length of an area surrounded by the network of the conductive portion in which the base film is exposed is larger than 1 and is equal to or less than 3.5.

 2 The conductive film according to the above 1 wherein the conductive portion of a random network structure is obtained by the steps of applying a solution for forming a conductive portion to the base film and drying the solution.

 3 The conductive film according to any one of the above wherein the conductive portion contains a conductive polymer and or a conductive particle.

 4 The conductive film according to any one of the above wherein the conductive portion of the conductive film includes a layer containing a conductive polymer and or a conductive particle and a metal layer provided on the layer.

 5 The conductive film according to any one of the above wherein the prime constituent of metal to form the metal layer is copper.

 6 The conductive film according to any one of the above wherein the conductive film is an electromagnetic interference film.

It is now possible to provide a conductive film having transparency and a high level of electrical conductivity as well as less moir and further it is possible to provide an excellent electromagnetic interference film hardly causing a moir phenomenon when a metal layer is provided on its conductive portion. This conductive film is very useful for flat panel displays such as a plasma display panel and a liquid crystal television.

Our conductive film is a conductive film in which a conductive portion of a random network structure is present on at least one surface of a base film a line width of the conductive portion composing the network structure is 30 m or less an area of portions where the conductive portion is not present is 50 or more with respect to an area of the conductive film and an average of ratios of a major axis length to a minor axis length of an area surrounded by the network of the conductive portion in which the base film is exposed is larger than 1 and is equal to or less than 3.5.

The base film is preferably a film composed of a resin. Preferably the resin is further a thermoplastic resin. The thermoplastic resin film collectively refers to films which are melted or softened by heating. The thermoplastic resin film is not particularly limited and typical examples of thermoplastic resin films to be used may include polyester films polyolefin films such as polypropylene films and polyethylene films polylactic acid films polycarbonate films acrylic films such as polymethyl methacrylate films and polystyrene films 

polyamide films such as nylon polyvinyl chloride films polyurethane films fluorine based films and polyphenylene sulfide films.

A resin composing the base film may be homopolymers or copolymers. Among them polyester films polypropylene films polyamide films and the like are preferable from the viewpoint of mechanical properties the dimensional stability the transparency and the like and furthermore polyester films are preferable from the viewpoint of the mechanical strength the general versatility and the like.

These films may contain various additives e.g. antioxidants heat stabilizers weathering stabilizers ultraviolet absorbers organic lubricants pigments dyes organic or inorganic fine particles fillers antistatic agents and crystal nucleating agents to the extent that the characteristic properties are not deteriorated.

The thickness of the base film is not specifically limited and is appropriately selected in accordance with the applications and the kinds of the conductive film. Preferably the thickness is usually 10 to 500 m more preferably is 38 to 250 m and most preferably is 75 to 150 m from the viewpoint of the mechanical strength handleability and the like.

The example in which a polyester film is used as a base film of the conductive film will be described below.

A polyester composing a polyester film refers to polymers in which ester bonding is a primary bonding chain in a main chain. As the polyester polyethylene terephthalate polyproylene terephthalate ethylene 2 6 naphthalate polybutylene terephthalate polypropylene 2 6 naphthalate polyethylene bis 2 chlorophenoxy ethane 4 4 dicarboxylate and the like are exemplified and polyesters including at least one constituent selected from the group consisting of the above mentioned polymers as a primary constituent can be preferably used.

These constituents may be used alone or in combination of two or more kinds. Most of all it is particularly preferable to use polyethylene terephthalate considering collectively all the factors e.g. quality and economy involved. When the conductive film is used for the case where there is a step of performing intensive heat treatment or tending to produce shrinkage stress polyethylene 2 6 naphthalate having excellent heat resistance and stiffness is also suitably used. Other dicarboxylic acid components and or idol components may be copolymerized as a part of two polyesters exemplified here preferably at 20 mole percent or less. Also hydroxyl carboxylic acid components may be copolymerized.

It is suitable for performing the disclosure that the intrinsic viscosity measured in o chlorophenol at 25 C. of the above described polyester is preferably within the range of 0.4 to 1.2 dl g and more preferably within the range of 0.5 to 0.8 dl g.

Preferably the polyester film of a base material is biaxially oriented. In general the biaxially oriented polyester film refers to a polyester film which is prepared by stretching an unstretched polyester sheet or film preferably by about 2.5 to 5 times in each of a longitudinal direction and a width direction respectively and then processing the film with a heat treatment to complete crystalline orientation. This film exhibits a wide angle X ray diffraction pattern attributed to biaxial orientation.

A polyester film to be a base film may be a composite film prepared by coextrusion. On the other hand the resulting films may also be bonded to each other by various methods to be used.

Next the conductive portion of a random network structure which is present on at least one surface of the base film will be described.

The random network structure is observed as a structure in such a random state that a shape and a size of an area surrounded by the conductive portion in which the conductive portion is not present are irregular when the conductive film is observed with a scanning electron microscope hereinafter abbreviated as SEM . Therefore the shape of the conductive portion is observed as a shape in an irregular state.

A SEM observation image of the conductive layer formed on a base film of the conductive film is shown in . shows an example of a SEM observation image of a conductive portion consisting of a conductive portion of a random network structure and a base film. It can be said that this configuration is similar to the surface of a muskmelon. Straight lines in the lower right hand corner of the drawings are scales and for example in the length of the straight line in the lower right hand corner represents 10 m.

A width of the conductive portion needs to be 30 m or less. A line width of the conductive portion may be constant or may vary and for example in the conductive portion is observed as a mesh having line widths varying from about 0.3 m to about 1 m. This width is usually at least 0.2 m and 0.5 to 25 m and preferably 1 to 20 m. When the width of the conductive portion is too small electrical conductivity is hardly exhibited and on the other hand when it is too large a total light transmittance is apt to decrease in the case of using the conductive film as an electromagnetic interference film and the conductive film is readily observed.

It is preferable that at least a part of the conductive portion of the network structure is continuous. When the conductive portion is not continuous this can be distinguished through from that the electrical conductivity of the surface is not exhibited.

In the conductive film it is necessary that an area of portions where the conductive portion is not present is 50 or more with respect to an area of the conductive film and this area is preferably 60 or more and more preferably 70 or more particularly from the viewpoint of transparency.

When the percentage of this area is low it is not desirable since a total light transmittance is lowered in the case of using the conductive film as an electromagnetic interference film. On the other hand an upper limit of the percentage of this area may be less than 100 but it becomes 90 or less in actual production and use.

The electrical conductivity of the surface of the conductive film is not particularly limited as long as an electromagnetic interference function can be attained but for example it is preferably 1 10 or less more preferably 1 10 or less and most preferably 1 or less. Further the electrical conductivity to be used is preferably 0.1 or less in the case of shielding an electromagnetic wave emitted from a PDP television and the like.

A higher transmittance of the conductive film is preferable and it is preferably 55 or more and more preferably 60 or more.

Further a ratio of a major axis length to a minor axis length of an area hereinafter referred to as a open area surrounded by the network of the conductive portion in which the base film is exposed is important. The major axis length and the minor axis length are determined by following procedure using .

The longest location of an open area surrounded by a watched conductive portion is defined as a major axis A. The length of this location is taken as a major axis length. Assuming two straight lines B B in parallel with the defined major axis the two straight lines are placed so that they circumscribe the open area and a distance between them becomes maximum and a distance C between these straight lines is taken as a minor axis length.

The average ratios of the major axis length to the minor axis length needs to be larger than 1 and be equal to or less than 3.5. When the ratio is 1 a problem that the regularity of the network portion is enhanced and a moir phenomenon tends to occur. When the ratio is larger than 3.5 there is a problem that anisotropy in images occurs particularly when the conductive film is used in front of an optical illuminant device such as a PDP television. A preferable ratio of the major axis length to the minor axis length is 1.2 or more and furthermore 1.5 or more for a lower value and 3 or less further 2.5 or less and furthermore 1.8 or less for an upper value.

The conductive portion of the conductive film can be obtained by applying a coating solution containing either a material containing a conductive component or a material to have electrical conductivity through a subsequent operation onto the surface of the film and drying the coating solution. For example in a manufacturing step of biaxially stretching a polyester film successively in which a step of stretching in a longitudinal direction and a step of stretching in a width direction are performed a method in which the coating solution is applied onto the surface of the film and dried between step of stretching in a longitudinal direction and the step of stretching in a width direction and then the dried film is further stretched and heat treated that is the so called in line coating method can be used. In the step of stretching a film in a width direction a layer applied with the coating solution produces cracks through stretching and a conductive portion of the random network structure can be obtained.

As a component contained in the coating solution a conductive polymer and or a conductive particle is preferable. As the conductive polymer polythiophene polyaniline polypyrrole and derivatives thereof can be used and as the conductive particle particles of indium oxide tin oxide zinc oxide silver gold copper platinum nickel zinc and the like can be used.

In particular with respect to polythiophene which is a conductive polymer the development of a coating solution in which water is used as a medium is advanced by the recent research and development and this coating solution can also be suitably employed in our disclosure. As a coating solution furthermore preferably a solution containing a mixture of polythiophene and or a polythiophene derivative and polyanion hereinafter referred to as a polythiophene polyanion mixture can be used.

The above mentioned polythiophene polyanion mixture can be obtained by the step of obtaining a polymer having the following repeat structure 

As a material to give the conductive portion polythiophene and or a polythiophene derivative having a structural formula represented by the second repeat structure is preferably used. For example a preferable compound is represented by the second repeat structure where n 1 a methylene group n 2 an ethylene group or n 3 a trimethylene group . Among them a compound including an ethylene group in which n 2 that is poly 3 4 ethylene dioxythiophene is particularly preferable.

Further examples of the polythiophene and or the polythiophene derivative include compounds having a structure in which substituents are bonded at positions 3 and 4 of a thiophene ring and furthermore a compound in which oxygen atoms are bonded to carbon atoms at positions 3 and 4 as described above. With respect to compounds in which hydrogen atoms or carbon atoms are directly bonded to the above described carbon atoms water may not be readily used as a medium of the coating solution.

The polyanion compound is an acid polymer which can be a free acid and is a polymer having a carboxylic acid a polymer having a sulfonic acid or the like. Examples of polymers having a carboxylic acid include polyacrylic acid polymethacrylic acid and polymaleic acid. Examples of polymers having a sulfonic acid include polystyrenesulfonic acid and polyvinylsulfonic acid. In particular the polystyrenesulfonic acid is most preferable from the viewpoint of the electrical conductivity of a conductive portion to be obtained. Here a part of functional groups to give free acids may be in the form of neutralized salts.

When these polyanion compounds are added during the step of polymerizing for obtaining polythiophene and or a polythiophene derivative described above inherently water insoluble polythiophene based compounds are readily dispersed in water or readily dissolved in water. Further it is believed that the function as an acid serves the function as a dopant of the polythiophene based compound and also serves an effect of improving the electrical conductivity.

As the polyanion compound described above copolymers formed by copolymerization of other copolymerizable monomers e.g. acrylates methacrylates and styrene can also be used.

The molecular weights of the polyanion compounds such as a carboxylic acid containing polymer and a sulfonic acid containing polymer are not specifically limited but the weight average molecular weight thereof is preferably 1 000 to 1 000 000 and more preferably 5 000 to 150 000 from the viewpoint of the stability of the coating solution and the conductive portion. A part of anions may be neutralized by or may form salts with alkali metals such as lithium sodium and the like alkaline earth metals such as calcium and the like and ammonium ion to the extent that the characteristic properties of our disclosure are not impaired.

In the polythiophene polyanion mixture it is preferable from the viewpoint of the electrical conductivity that the polyanion is allowed to excessively present with respect to the total amount of the polythiophene and the polythiophene derivative on a weight of solid basis. Preferably the polyanion is more than 1 part by weight and is equal to or less than 5 parts by weight with respect to 1 part by weight of the total of the polythiophene and the polythiophene derivative and more preferably is more than 1 part by weight and is equal to or less than 3 parts by weight. In addition the polythiophene polyanion mixture can be produced by methods described in for example Japanese Unexamined Patent Publication No. 2000 6324 European Patent No. 602713 U.S. Pat. No. 5 391 472 and the like although methods other than them may be adopted.

For example 3 4 ethylenedioxythiophene is prepared using an alkali metal salt of 3 4 dihydroxythiophene 2 5 dicarboxyester as a starting material. Thereafter potassium peroxodisulfate iron sulfate and 3 4 ethylenedioxythiophene prepared in advance are introduced into and reacted with a polystyrenesulfonic acid aqueous solution so that a composition can be prepared in which a polyanion such as polystyrenesulfonic acid forms a complex with a polythiophene such as poly 3 4 ethylenedioxythiophene .

As a water based coating solution containing poly 3 4 ethylenedioxythiophene and polystyrenesulfonic acid a product sold by H.C. Starck Ltd. German under the trade name Baytron P or the like can be employed.

By containing a resin such as a polyester resin an urethane resin an acrylic resin or an epoxy cross linking agent other than the above mentioned polythiophene polyanion mixture in the polythiophene polyanion mixture in the coating solution the random network structure can be formed effectively. For example when only the polythiophene polyanion mixture is used as a solute the polythiophene has few follow up properties to stretching of the base material and therefore the occurrence of cracks becomes marked and the conductive portion tends to be independent and the network structure is hardly formed as a conductive portion. Naturally the electrical conductivity of the film is hardly exhibited. On the other hand when large amounts of these resins are added the network structure is not formed. By adjusting the content of the polythiophene polyanion mixture in the solute in the coating solution usually to 8 to 50 percent by weight preferably to 10 to 50 percent by weight and more preferably to 12 to 25 percent by weight and on the other hand by adjusting the content of the resin other than the polythiophene polyanion mixture usually to 50 to 92 percent by weight preferably to 50 to 90 percent by weight and more preferably to 75 to 88 percent by weight the random network structure is formed effectively.

Examples of preferable polyester resins contained in the coating solution include polymers or copolymers formed by using acid components selected from terephthalic acid isophthalic acid sebacic acid and 5 sodium sulfoisophthalic acid and or diol components selected from ethylene glycol diethylene glycol 1 4 butanediol and neopentyl glycol. In the case where the water resistance is required copolymers in which trimellitic acid is used as a copolymer component in place of 5 sodium sulfoisophthalic acid may also be suitably used.

Preferably the glass transition temperature hereinafter abbreviated as Tg of the polyester resin is 0 C. to 130 C. and more preferably is 10 C. to 85 C. If the Tg is lower than 0 C. for example a blocking phenomenon may occur in which in winding up a conductive film provided with a conductive portion the conductive portion is adhered to the base film when the conductive portion is provided on only the one side of the film and conductive portions are mutually adhered when the conductive portion is provided on both sides of the film. When the Tg is extremely high it is undesirable since the stability and the dispersibility in water of the resin may become poor. An amount of the polyester resin to be added is preferably 10 to 50 percent by weight in the solute of the coating solution and more preferably 17 to 34 percent by weight.

Further as an epoxy based cross linking agent suitably added to the coating solution for example agents of sorbitol polyglycidyl ether based polyglycerol polyglycidylether based diglycerol polyglycidyl ether based polyethylene glycol diglycidyl ether based or the like may be used. Examples of suitable cross linking agents may include an epoxy compound DENACOL EX 611 EX 614 EX 614B EX 512 EX 521 EX 421 EX 313 EX 810 EX 830 EX 850 etc. produced by Nagase ChemteX Corporation diepoxy and polyepoxy based compounds SR EG SR 8EG SR GLG etc. produced by SAKAMOTO YAKUHIN KOGYO CO. LTD. an epoxy cross linking agent EPICLON EM 85 75W or CR 5L produced by DAINIPPON INK AND CHEMICALS INCORPORATED. Among them water soluble cross linking agents are preferable. An amount of the epoxy based cross linking agent to be added is preferably 25 to 75 percent by weight and more preferably 30 to 60 percent by weight in the solute of the coating solution.

Furthermore various additives such as antioxidants heat stabilizers weathering stabilizers ultraviolet absorbers organic lubricants pigments dyes organic or inorganic fine particles fillers nucleating agents and the like may also be blended in the solute of the coating solution within the range of not detracting the effects of our disclosure.

As the method for coating the base film with the coating solution for example a reverse coating method a spray coating method a bar coating method a gravure coating method a rod coating method and a die coating method can be used.

The thickness of the conductive portion prepared from this coating solution is not particularly limited but preferably it is usually in a range of 0.01 to 5 m and more preferably in a range of 0.02 to 2 m. If the thickness of the conductive portion is too small the electrical conductivity may become poor.

As a further preferable method for providing the conductive portion a method in which the coating solution is applied during the step of manufacturing a polyester film and is stretched together with the base film is most suitable. For example the film provided with the conductive portion can be prepared by the step in line coating method in which a melt extruded polyester film before crystalline orientation is done is stretched by about 2.5 to 5 times in a longitudinal direction and a coating solution is continuously applied to the resulting monoaxially oriented film and the film coated with the coating solution is dried while being passed through a stepwise heated zone and stretched by about 2.5 to 5 times in a width direction and furthermore the resulting film is continuously led to a heating zone at 150 C. to 250 C. and crystalline orientation is completed. The coating solution used in this case is preferably a water based coating solution from the viewpoints of environmental pollution and an explosion protective property.

It is preferable that before the coating solution is applied the surface of a base film is subjected to a corona discharge treatment and the like so that the wetting tension of the base film surface is preferably at least 47 mN m and more preferably at least 50 mN m because the adhesion of the conductive portion to the base film can be improved. Naturally a method of subjecting the monoaxially oriented film to a treatment for improving the wetting tension may be employed. Further it is also preferable that a small amount of organic solvent such as isopropyl alcohol butyl cellosolve or N methyl 2 pyrrolidone is contained in the coating solution and thereby the wettability and the adhesion to the base film are improved.

Next the method for manufacturing a conductive film will be described in further detail with reference to the example in which polyethylene terephthalate hereafter abbreviated as PET is used as the base film although not limited to this.

The method for manufacturing a conductive film will be described with reference to further specific example.

PET pellets having an intrinsic viscosity of 0.5 to 0.8 dl g are vacuum dried and then are supplied to an extruder. The pellets are melted at 260 C. to 300 C. and are extruded from a T die into the form of a sheet. The resulting sheet is wound around a mirror finished casting drum having a surface temperature of 10 C. to 60 C. by the use of an electrostatic casting method followed by cooling and solidifying so that an unstretched PET film is prepared. This unstretched film is stretched by 2.5 to 5 times in a longitudinal direction film traveling direction between rolls heated to 70 C. to 120 C. At least one surface of this film is subjected to a corona discharge treatment so that the wetting tension of the surface is at least 47 mN m and the water based coating solution that becomes a conductive portion is applied to the treated surface. This coated film is grasped with clips and is led to a hot air zone heated to 70 C. to 150 C. to be dried. The film is further stretched by 2.5 to 5 times in a width direction and subsequently is led to a heat treatment zone at 160 C. to 250 C. A heat treatment is performed for 1 to 30 seconds so that crystalline orientation is completed. A treatment for relaxation of 1 to 10 percent in a width direction or a longitudinal direction may be performed as required during this heat treatment step.

It becomes possible to use this film as a electromagnetic interference film used in flat panel displays such as a plasma display panel and a liquid crystal television by providing a metal layer such as a copper layer on the network structure prepared from the above mentioned coating solution to form a conductive portion consisting of a layer composed of a coating solution and a metal layer.

There is for example a method for applying electrolytic copper plating directly to a conductive film having a conductive portion prepared from the above mentioned coating solution. Further there is a method in which a nucleic agent for nonelectrolytic plating such as palladium is deposited on the conductive film having a conductive portion prepared from the above mentioned coating solution and then nonelectrolytic nickel plating or nonelectrolytic copper plating is applied. Further there is another method in which a method for applying electrolytic copper plating onto the layer obtained by the above mentioned nonelectrolytic plating is exemplified a catalyst for nonelectrolytic plating for example metal fine particles such as a copper fine particle a palladium fine particle and a silver fine particle is mixed in the coating solution for forming a conductive portion in advance and thereafter a conductive portion of the network structure is formed on a base film and nonelectrolytic plating is applied directly to the resulting conductive film to obtain a metal layer. Particularly the method described last is useful because number of processes is small.

A size of the metal fine particle which can be used at this time is not particularly limited but a number average particle diameter of 0.001 to 1 m is preferable. When the number average particle diameter of the metal fine particles exceeds this range the metal layer may be hardly formed in the form of a network. Preferably the number average particle diameter of the metal fine particles is 0.001 to 0.5 m and more preferably 0.002 to 0.1 m. A particle diameter of the metal fine particle contained in a metal fine particle layer may be large or small and may be irregular or uniform. Metal used for the metal fine particle is not particularly limited and platinum gold silver copper nickel palladium rhodium ruthenium bismuth cobalt iron aluminum zinc and tin can be used but particularly palladium silver and copper which become a catalyst of nonelectrolytic plating can be suitably used. In addition these metal may be used singly or in combination of two or more kinds.

Examples of methods of preparing metal fine particles include a chemical method in which a metal ion is reduced in a liquid layer to form a metal atom and the metal atom is grown to a nanoparticle through a atomic cluster a technique in which a bulk metals is vaporized in an inert gas to form metal fine particles and these metal fine particles is collected with a cold trap and a physical method in which a metal thin film obtained by vacuum deposition on a polymer thin film is heated to break the metal thin film and nanoparticles of broken metal is dispersed in a polymer in a solid state.

Methods for measuring characteristic properties and methods for evaluating effects are as described below.

A sample for example a cross section of a laminated polyester film was cut out into a extremely thin slice and this slice was observed and photographed with a TEM transmission electron microscope using a method of an extremely thin slice stained by ruthenic acid RuO or osmic acid OsO or double stained by both of RuOand OsO. The thickness was determined from the cross sectional photograph

The surface of a film was observed with a scanning electron microscope S 2100A type Hitachi Scanning Electron Microscope manufactured by Hitachi Ltd. and a ratio of a major axis length to a minor axis length of an area open area surrounded by the network of the conductive portion in which the base film was exposed a configuration of the network structure and a width of the network structure were observed. Further in the above observation a magnification of the observation image was adjusted in such a way that the number of open areas was 10 or more. The ratio of a major axis length to a minor axis length was determined by measuring all of open areas in a region observed and averaging the measurements. However the open area a part of which was out of a field of view and the shape of which could not be identified in the region was excluded from calculation of this ratio.

In the images observed in the above paragraph 2 areas of the network structure were marked with black color and the respective areas were separated into a white portion area other than the network structure and a black portion area of the network structure by an image analyzer and an aperture ratio was calculated according to the following equation. Area ratio of portion where a conductive portion does not exist area of white portion area of white portion area of black portion 100

The electrical conductivity was measured based on the surface resistivity. A sample was left standing for 24 hours at normal conditions 23 C. relative humidity 65 percent and in that atmosphere the surface resistivity was measured with LORESTA EP manufactured by Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation Model MCP T360 according to JIS K 7194. Measuring unit is . This apparatus can measure in a range of 1 10 or less. On the other hand when a measuring range is 1 10 or more after the application of an applied voltage of 100 V for 10 seconds the surface resistivity was measured with a digital super high resistance microammeter R8340A manufactured by ADVANTEST CORPORATION . The unit is .

The transparency was evaluated by the haze and the total light transmittance. A film was left standing for 2 hours at normal conditions 23 C. relative humidity 65 percent and then the haze and the total light transmittance were measured with a fully automatic direct reading Haze Computer HGM 2DP manufactured by SUGA TEST INSTRUMENTS Co. Ltd. An average value of 3 measurements was taken as the haze value and the total light transmittance of the sample. In addition the film was placed in such a way that light enters from the surface on which the conductive portion was provided to be measured.

A solution in which metal fine particles are dispersed was applied onto a copper mesh and this mesh was observed with a transmission electron microscope H 7100FA manufactured by Hitachi Ltd. to determine a number average particle diameter of metal fine particles. Particle diameters of 100 metal fine particles were measured and an average thereof was taken as a number average particle diameter.

The conductive film of our disclosure or the electromagnetic interference film was held just anterior to a flat panel display screen on which a image is displayed in such a way that the screen and the film are in parallel with each other and a substrate was rotated by 360 angle while maintaining a state in which the screen and the film surface are in parallel with each other and the occurrence of the moir phenomenon during this rotation was visually checked to evaluate the anti a moir phenomenon. The evaluations were performed using a liquid crystal display E152FPb manufactured by Dell Inc. as a flat pane display.

A mixture prepared by mixing the above described coating solution A1 and coating solution C1 at a ratio of coating solution A1 coating solution C1 16 50 on a weight of solid basis was aged at room temperature for 5 days abbreviated to as an aged coating solution 1 . Then a coating solution for forming a conductive portion was prepared by mixing this aged coating solution 1 and the coating solution B1 at a ratio of aged coating solution 1 coating solution B1 66 34 on a weight of solid basis. At this time a ratio between the coating solutions on a weight of solid basis was coating solution A1 coating solution B1 coating solution C1 16 34 50.

Next forming of a film and application of the above coating solution were performed by the following steps.

PET pellets an intrinsic viscosity 0.65 dl g were adequately vacuum dried and then were supplied to an extruder. The pellets were melted at a temperature of 285 C. and were extruded from a T die into the form of a sheet. The resulting sheet was wound around a mirror finished casting drum having a surface temperature of 25 C. by the use of an electrostatic casting method followed by cooling and solidifying. The unstretched film thus prepared was heated to 89 C. and was stretched by 3.3 times in a longitudinal direction so that a monoaxially oriented film was prepared. This monoaxially oriented film was subjected to a corona discharge treatment in air in order that the wetting tension of the film became 55 mN m. A coating solution for forming a conductive portion described below was applied to the treated surface.

The monoaxially oriented film to which the coating solution was applied was grasped with clips and was led to a preheating zone. After drying was performed at a temperature of 95 C. the film was subsequently continuously stretched by 4.0 times in a width direction in a heating zone at a temperature of 110 C. and furthermore was subjected to a heat treatment in a heating zone at a temperature of 230 C. so that a PET film provided with a conductive portion was prepared wherein crystalline orientation was completed. The thickness of the obtained PET film was 100 m and the thickness of the conductive portion was 0.02 m on average. The results are shown in Table 1. Excellent transparency and electrical conductivity were exhibited. A moir phenomenon did not arise. A scanning electron microscope SEM observation image magnification of 3000 times of the conductive film having a conductive portion of a random network structure in the present Example is shown in .

A PET film provided with a conductive portion was prepared by the same procedure as in Example 1 except that a coating solution for forming a conductive portion described below was used in place of the coating solution for forming a conductive portion used in Example 1.

A mixture prepared by mixing the above described coating solution A1 and coating solution C1 at a ratio of coating solution A1 coating solution C1 8 75 on a weight of solid basis was aged at room temperature for 5 days abbreviated to as an aged coating solution 2 . Then a coating solution for forming a conductive portion was prepared by mixing this aged coating solution 2 and the coating solution B1 at a ratio of aged coating solution 2 coating solution B1 83 17 on a weight of solid basis. The results are shown in Table 1. Excellent transparency and electrical conductivity were exhibited. A moir phenomenon did not arise.

A PET film provided with a conductive portion was prepared by the same procedure as in Example 1 except that a coating solution for forming a conductive portion described below was used in place of the coating solution for forming a conductive portion used in Example 1.

A mixture prepared by mixing the above described coating solution A1 and coating solution C1 at a ratio of coating solution A1 coating solution C1 25 25 on a weight of solid basis was aged at room temperature for 5 days abbreviated to as an aged coating solution 3 . Then a coating solution for forming a conductive portion was prepared by mixing this aged coating solution 3 and the coating solution B1 at a ratio of aged coating solution 3 coating solution B1 50 50 on a weight of solid basis. The results are shown in Table 1. Excellent transparency and electrical conductivity were exhibited. A moir phenomenon did not arise.

A PET film provided with a conductive portion was prepared by the same procedure as in Example 1 except that a coating solution for forming a conductive portion described below was used in place of the coating solution for forming a conductive portion used in Example 1.

A mixture prepared by mixing the above described coating solution A1 and coating solution C2 at a ratio of coating solution A1 coating solution C2 16 50 on a weight of solid basis was aged at room temperature for 5 days abbreviated to as an aged coating solution 4 . Then a coating solution for forming a conductive portion was prepared by mixing this aged coating solution 4 and the coating solution B2 at a ratio of aged coating solution 4 coating solution B2 66 34 on a weight of solid basis. At this time a ratio between the coating solutions on a weight of solid basis was coating solution A1 coating solution B2 coating solution C2 16 34 50. The results are shown in Table 1. Excellent transparency and electrical conductivity were exhibited. A moir phenomenon did not arise.

A PET film provided with a conductive portion was prepared by the same procedure as in Example 1 except that a coating solution for forming a conductive portion described below was used in place of the coating solution for forming a conductive portion used in Example 1.

A mixture prepared by mixing the above described coating solution A1 and coating solution C1 at a ratio of coating solution A1 coating solution C1 16 50 on a weight of solid basis was aged at room temperature for 5 days abbreviated to as an aged coating solution 1 . Then this aged coating solution 1 and the coating solution B1 was mixed at a ratio of aged coating solution 1 coating solution B1 66 34 on a weight of solid basis to obtain a mixture. Further silver bromide powder produced by Wako Pure Chemical Industries Ltd. was ground for 1 hour with a mortar to obtain more fine powder and this more fine powder was dispersed in an aqueous solution of a nonionic surfactant OLFINE EXP 4051F produced by Nissin Chemical Industry Co. Ltd. with a homogenizer to obtain a dispersion. A coating solution for forming a conductive portion was prepared by adding 5 parts by weight of the obtained dispersion on a weight of solid basis to the obtained mixture. At this time a ratio between the respective coating solutions on a weight of solid basis was coating solution A1 coating solution B1 coating solution C1 silver bromide 16 34 50 5.

The obtained conductive film having a conductive portion of a random network structure was subjected to an ultraviolet irradiation treatment wattage of a lamp 120 W a line speed 1 m min irradiation intensity 1000 mJ cm the number of irradiation twice and was exposed and then the exposed film was developed and fixed using a commercially available developing solution FUJIDOL E for monochrome photographs produced by FUJIFILM Corporation and a commercially available fixing solution FUJIFIX for monochrome films produced by FUJIFILM Corporation . The following nonelectrolytic copper plating was carried out using silver produced in the network structure as a catalyst.

A conductive portion consisting of a layer formed from a coating solution and a metal layer could be prepared by providing metal copper layer on the conductive portion formed from the coating solution for a conductive film. The results are shown in Table 2. Excellent transparency and electrical conductivity were exhibited. A moir phenomenon did not arise.

Monoethanolamine was added dropwise to an aqueous solution of silver nitrate to obtain an aqueous solution of silver alkanolamine complex aqueous solution 1 . Separately from this solution an aqueous solution aqueous solution 2 formed by adding monoethanolamine to an aqueous solution in which quinine was dissolved as a reducing agent was prepared. Next the aqueous solution 1 and the aqueous solution 2 were simultaneously poured into a plastic container and the silver alkanolamine complex was reduced to silver fine particles. This mixture solution was filtrated washed with water and dried to obtain silver fine particles. Further these silver fine particles were re dispersed in water to obtain a silver fine particle dispersion. Number average particle diameter of silver fine particles was 1.4 m.

A coated film in which a layer of a silver fine particle was laminated in the form of random network was obtained by printing the silver fine particle solution prepared in Synthetic Example 1 in a random network structure shown in on one side of a biaxially oriented polyethylene terephthalate film Lumirror U94 produced by Toray Industries Inc. by screen printing and drying the printed solution at 120 C. for 1 minute. The thickness of the network structure was adjusted to 2 m. The layer of a silver fine particle of this coated film was immersed in 0.1 N hydrochloric acid N 10 hydrochloric acid produced by NACALAI TESQUE Inc. for 2 minutes. Then after the coated film was taken out and washed with water it was dried at 120 C. for 1 minute.

The results are shown in Table 2. Excellent transparency and electrical conductivity were exhibited. A moir phenomenon did not arise.

The nonelectrolytic copper plating described in Example 5 was applied to the coated film prepared in Example 6 for 20 minutes. The results are shown in Table 2. Excellent transparency and electrical conductivity were exhibited. A moir phenomenon did not arise.

A coated film in which a layer of a silver fine particle was provided in the form of grid was obtained by printing the silver fine particle solution prepared in Synthetic Example 1 in the form of grid having a line thickness of 3 m a line width of 35 m and a pitch of 300 m on one side of a biaxially oriented polyethylene terephthalate film Lumirror U94 produced by Toray Industries Inc. by screen printing and drying the printed solution at 120 C. for 1 minute. The results are shown in Table 2. This coated film is low in electrical conductivity and produced a moir phenomenon.

The nonelectrolytic plating was performed for 40 minutes in Example 6. The results are shown in Table 2. This film was extremely low in the transparency.

To tetraethoxysilicate water hydrochloric acid and isopropyl alcohol were added and the resulting mixture was stirred at room temperature for 30 minutes and hydrolyzed. The obtained solution was applied onto a biaxially oriented polyethylene terephthalate film Lumirror T60 produced by Toray Industries Inc. with a bar coater in such a way that a coated thickness after drying is 0.4 m and the applied solution was dried at 120 C. for 30 minutes to obtain a sol gel film. A coated film produced cracks due to the heat shrinkage during curing and this cracks were used as a random network structure.

As with Example 6 a conductive film having a conductive portion of 3 m in thickness having the network structure was obtained by printing conductive thermosetting silver paste produced by TOYOBO CO. LTD. conductive thermosetting silver paste DW 250H 5 in a random network structure described above on one side of a biaxially oriented polyethylene terephthalate film Lumirror U94 produced by Toray Industries Inc. by screen printing and drying the printed solution at 130 C. for 30 minutes. The results are shown in Table 2. This film exhibited strong anisotropy such that the brightness varied depending on viewing angle and was not suitable for a display.

A PET film was prepared by the same procedure as in Example 1 except that a coating solution for forming a conductive portion described below was used in place of the coating solution for forming a conductive portion used in Example 1.

A coating solution for forming a conductive portion was prepared by using only the above mentioned coating solution A1. That is a resin other than the polythiophene polyanion mixture is not mixed. The results are shown in Table 2. This film was extremely low in the transparency and electrical conductivity and exhibited remarkable occurrences of cracks and strong anisotropy such that the brightness varied depending on viewing angle.

The conductive film has a random network structure and has transparency and a high level of electrical conductivity. Therefore by providing a metal layer such as a copper layer on the random network structure the conductive film is useful as an electromagnetic interference film hardly causing a moir phenomenon which is suitably used for flat panel displays such as a plasma display panel and a liquid crystal television.

