---

title: Chemical process
abstract: 

url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08034932&OS=08034932&RS=08034932
owner: AstraZeneca UK Limited
number: 08034932
owner_city: London
owner_country: GB
publication_date: 20051222
---
This invention concerns a novel chemical process and more particularly it concerns a novel chemical process for the manufacture of rosuvastatin and its pharmaceutically acceptable salts especially rosuvastatin calcium as well novel intermediates used in said process and processes for the manufacture of the novel intermediates.

Rosuvastatin and its pharmaceutically acceptable salts are HMG CoA reductase inhibitors and have use in the treatment of inter alia hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia. Rosuvastatin calcium is marketed under the trademark CRESTOR . European Patent Application Publication No. EPA 0521471 discloses E 7 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 methyl methylsulfonyl amino pyrimidin 5 yl 3R 5S 3 5 dihydroxyhept 6 enoic acid rosuvastatin and its sodium salt and calcium salt rosuvastatin calcium illustrated below and a process for their preparation.

Rosuvastatin and its pharmaceutically acceptable salts are obtained therein by condensation of methyl 3R 3 tert butyldimethylsilyl oxy 5 oxo 6 triphenylphosphoranylidene hexanoate with 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 N methyl N methanesulfonylamino 5 pyrimidinecarboxaldhyde followed by deprotection of the 3 hydroxy group asymmetric reduction of the 5 oxo group and hydrolysis.

Other processes for the preparation of rosuvastatin and its pharmaceutically acceptable salts are described in WO 00 49014 and WO 04 52867. The compound and its pharmaceutically acceptable salts are obtained in WO 00 49104 by reaction of diphenyl 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 methyl methylsulfonyl amino pyrimidin 5 ylmethyl phosphine oxide with tert butyl 2 4R 6S 6 formyl 2 2 dimethyl 1 3 dioxan 4 ylacetate in the presence of a base followed by removal of protecting groups. WO 04 52867 discloses the condensation of 1 cyano 2S 2 tert butyldimethylsilyl oxy 4 oxo 5 triphenylphosphoranylidene pentane with 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 N methyl N methanesulfonylamino 5 pyrimidinecarboxaldhyde followed by deprotection asymmetric reduction of the 4 oxo group and hydrolysis.

However there is a continuing need to identify alternative processes for the manufacture of rosuvastatin and its pharmaceutically acceptable salts. Such processes may for example when compared to previously known processes be more convenient to use be more suitable for large scale manufacture give the product in a better yield reduce the number of steps involved use intermediates which are more easily isolated require less complex purification techniques use less expensive reagents and or be more environmentally friendly.

WO 03 004450 Ciba Specialty Chemicals discloses a process for preparation of heptanoic acid derivatives and their use as intermediates in the synthesis of statin derivatives. WO 03 018555 Ciba Specialty Chemicals discloses a process for preparation of indole derivatives such as fluvastatin. EP252476 Warner Lambert discloses compounds which are HMG CoA reductase inhibitors and a process for their synthesis.

We have now discovered a particularly useful process for preparing rosuvastatin and its pharmaceutically acceptable salts.

According to a first aspect of the invention there is provided a process for the manufacture of a compound of formula I

 g when A is a group vi carrying out in any order the steps of 1 asymmetric hydration of the ring carbon carbon double bond and 2 hydrolysis under basic conditions and

 h when A is a group vii carrying out in any order the steps of 1 asymmetric reduction of the carbon carbon double bond adjacent to the group COOR 2 when Pis a hydroxy protecting group removal of the protecting group P 3 when Pis a hydroxy protecting group removal of the protecting group P and 4 removal of the protecting group R 

whereafter when the product is obtained in the free acid form optionally forming a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of the compound of formula I or when the product is obtained as a salt optionally converting the product to a different pharmaceutically acceptable salt.

For the avoidance of doubt the carbon atom bearing the group OPin the group A i is attached directly to the carbon carbon double bond of formula III and the groups A ii to A vii are attached in a likewise manner.

It will be appreciated that tautomeric forms of the groups A are also included within the scope of the present invention. For example when A is a group vii in which Pis hydrogen this may exist in the keto form shown below.

Suitable palladium catalysts are for example those disclosed in J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2001 123 6989 7000 which reference and more particularly the palladium catalysts described therein are hereby incorporated herein by reference and analogous palladium catalysts for carrying out the so called Heck reaction. Although the Heck reaction is well known in the art for coupling certain aryl and heteroaryl halides or triflates or acid chlorides with alkenes it has surprisingly been found that the Heck reaction can be carried out with a fully substituted sterically hindered 6 membered pyrimidine of formula II.

Particularly suitable palladium catalysts include for example those with trialkylphosphine ligands Pd P alkyl especially bis tri tert butylphosphine palladium 0 . A Pd P alkyl catalyst wherein the alkyl group is tert butyl such as a mixture of Pd dba and P t Bu may also be used.

The term catalytically effective amount means an amount from 1 mol to 30 mol particularly from 2 mol to 20 mol and more particularly from 5 mol to 10 mol based on the amount of the compound of formula II.

Generally the reaction is carried out in a suitable solvent such as toluene diphenyl ether and poly ethylene glycol and particularly N N dimethylformamide N methylpyrrolidone N N dimethylacetamide or dimethylsulfoxide and more particularly water and binary mixtures of water and N N dimethylformamide and N N dimethylacetamide.

Generally the reaction is carried out at a temperature in the range 30 110 C. particularly 40 80 C. more particularly 50 60 C.

Suitable bases for use in the process of the invention include for example amine bases such as ammonia and particularly bulky tertiary amines such as N methyldicyclohexylamine used either stoichiometrically or catalytically with a stoichiometric amount of an inorganic base such as cesium carbonate.

The reaction may also optionally be carried out in the presence of a tetrabutylammonium salt such as tetrabutylammonium chloride or tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate.

Particularly combinations of palladium catalyst solvent and base optionally in the presence of a tetrabutylammonium salt which are suitable for carrying out the process of the invention include the following 

Bis tri tert butylphosphine palladium 0 water N N dicyclohexylmethylamine tetrabutylammonium chloride 

Bis tri tert butylphosphine palladium 0 water N N dicyclohexylmethylamine tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate 

Bis tri tert butylphosphine palladium 0 toluene N N dicyclohexylmethylamine tetrabutylammonium chloride 

Bis tri tert butylphosphine palladium 0 N N dimethylacetamide N N dicyclohexylmethylamine tetrabutylammonium chloride 

Bis tri tert butylphosphine palladium 0 water DMF 1 1 N N dicyclohexylmethylamine tetrabutylammonium chloride and

A leaving group L referred to hereinbefore or hereinafter includes for example chloro bromo iodo OSOCF COCl SOCl and C O O SORwherein Ris aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl particularly chloro bromo iodo OSOCF and more particularly bromo.

The term a group that is capable of conversion into a group Z means that the group Y is selected from any functional group which can be converted by carrying out one or more synthetic chemical steps to form the group Z. Suitable groups Y which are capable of such conversion and the synthetic chemical steps that can be used to carry out the conversion of Y into Z are well known in the art for example as described in standard works such as Contemporary Heterocyclic Chemistry by George R. Newkome and William W. Paudler published by John Wiley Sons Inc. and Advanced Organic Chemistry by J. March 4and 5Editions. Typical groups Y and synthetic chemical steps suitable for such conversion are illustrated for example in any of Schemes 1 to 5 or in the examples hereinafter or by analogy therewith.

A group Y referred to hereinbefore or hereinafter includes for example hydroxy chloro bromo iodo amino methylamino benzylamino methanesulfonylamino N benzylmethanesulfonylamino RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl RC O O wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . Particularly suitable groups Y include for example hydroxy chloro tosyloxy amino methylamino and methylsulfonylamino.

The term aryl herein includes for example a monocyclic or bicyclic aromatic hydrocarbon group that contains 6 12 atoms such as phenyl naphthyl tetrahydronaphthyl indenyl and indanyl particularly phenyl. The term substituted aryl means an aryl group bearing one or more substituents for example 1 to 3 substituents more particularly 1 to 2 substituents. Suitable substituents include for example 1 4C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl 1 4C alkoxy such as methoxy or ethoxy and halogeno such as chloro bromo or iodo .

The terms hydroxy protecting group and carboxy protecting group referred to hereinbefore or hereinafter mean that the hydroxy or carboxy group is protected from reaction by forming a suitable derivative such as a 1 4C alkyl ester group. A hydroxy protecting group also includes for example tetrahydropyranyl tert butyl methoxymethyl or a silyl radical for example a silyl radical of the formula SiRwherein the R radicals can be the same or different and are selected from 1 6C alkyl phenyl and phenyl 1 4C alkyl in which latter two groups a phenyl group is unsubstituted or bears a halogeno 1 4C alkoxy or 1 4C alkyl substituent. For example a group SiR includes trimethylsilyl and tert butyldimethylsilyl. Examples of suitable means of protection of hydroxy and carboxy groups as well as means of formation and eventual deprotection may be found in T. W. Greene and P. G. M. Wuts Protective Groups in Organic Synthesis Third Edition John Wiley Sons New York 1999. Particular protecting groups hereinbefore or hereinafter for Ptaken together with P or Ptaken together with P or Ptaken together with P to form a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group include those described in EPA 0319845 and GB 2244705 which are included herein by reference. Particularly suitable 1 3 dihydroxy protecting groups include for example the groups a b c and d illustrated below

Particularly suitable values for R R Rand Rinclude for example 1 4C alkyl such as methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl butyl and tert butyl especially the latter.

It will be appreciated that where more than one protecting group is removed after reacting a compound of the formula II with a compound of formula III the protecting groups may be removed in any order which allows the compound of formula I to be obtained. It will also be appreciated that protecting groups and conditions for their removal may be chosen which allow for simultaneous removal of more than one protecting group. However it is preferred to carry out a final step under non acidic conditions to avoid lactonisation of the compound of formula I.

A suitable pharmaceutically acceptable salt includes for example an alkali metal salt for example a sodium or potassium salt an alkaline earth metal salt for example calcium or magnesium salt an ammonium salt or a salt with an organic base which affords a physiologically acceptable cation for example with methylamine ethylamine dimethylamine trimethylamine morpholine diethanolamine tris 2 hydroxyethyl amine and tris hydroxymethyl methylamine.

When A is a group ii the asymmetric reduction of the carbonyl group adjacent to the carbon carbon double bond may be carried out for example using diethylmethoxyborane and sodium borohydride. The reaction may be carried out for example in an alcohol organic solvent mixture. The alcohol may be selected from for example methanol ethanol propanol and butanol. The non alcoholic organic solvent may be selected from for example acetonitrile diethyl ether tetrahydrofuran and dimethylformamide. A particularly suitable combination of solvents is for example methanol and tetrahydrofuran. The reaction is generally carried out at a temperature between 100 C. to 20 C. for example between 85 C. to 70 C. under cooling for 10 minutes to 20 hours for example 30 minutes to 10 hours.

When A is a group iv the asymmetric hydration of the carbon carbon double bond may be carried out for example using benzyl aldehyde in the presence of a base such as potassium tert butoxide or potassium hexamethyldisilazide in a suitable solvent such as tetrahydrofuran and at a temperature in the range of 20 C. to 10 C. such as about 0 C. by analogy with the procedure described in J. Org. Chem. 1993 58 2446 2453 which is hereby incorporated herein by reference.

When A is a group vi the asymmetric hydration of the carbon carbon double bond may be carried out for example using an appropriate alcohol such as allyl alcohol in the presence of a base such as LiOH or benzyl alcohol in the presence of a base such as NaOH followed by reduction using palladium on carbon or palladium hydroxide on carbon under acidic conditions by analogy with the procedure described in WO 02 05519 which is hereby incorporated herein by reference.

When A is a group vii the asymmetric reduction of the carbon carbon double bond adjacent to the group COORmay be carried out for example using similar conditions to those described above for the asymmetric reduction of the carbonyl group of A ii .

Particular values of variable radicals or groups are as follows. Such values may be used where appropriate with any other of the values definitions claims or embodiments defined hereinbefore or hereinafter.

 6 in formula III A is a group iii wherein Pand Pare both hydrogen and Pand Pare the same or different hydroxy protecting groups such as 1 4C alkyl groups for example methyl or ethyl 

 7 in formula III A is a group iv wherein Pis a hydroxy protecting group for example trimethylsilyl TMS triethylsilyl TES tert butyldiphenylsilyl TBDPS or tert butyldimethylsilyl TBDMS 

 12 in formula III A is a group vii wherein Pis hydrogen and Ptogether with Ris a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group for example Ptogether with Ris an acetonide protecting group .

Starting materials of the formula II may be obtained and conversion of a group Y into a group Z may be carried out for example as illustrated in the examples or as shown in Schemes 1 to 5 below or by analogy therewith. It will be appreciated that when a compound of the formula II wherein X is a group Y is reacted with a compound of the formula III then the intermediate obtained will include for example a compound as set out in Schemes 1 to 5 bearing the group L but in which the group L is replaced by CH CH A. The group Y may then be converted to the group CHSON CH using one or more of the synthetic chemical steps illustrated in Schemes 1 to 5. In Schemes 1 to 5 and elsewhere herein the following abbreviations are used 

EtOH ethanol NBS N bromosuccinimide DMF N N dimethylformamide TEA triethylamine MeCN acetonitrile MsCl mesyl chloride TsCl tosyl chloride OTs tosyloxy THF tetrahydrofuran IPA isopropanol DCM dichloromethane

Starting materials of formula III are already known or may be obtained for example using analogous processes to those used for obtaining the known compounds or structurally related compounds or as illustrated in the examples hereinafter or by analogy therewith.

A compound of the formula III wherein A is a group i may be obtained for example as described in Org. Lett. 2003 Vol. 5 No. 23 4385 4388 or SynLett 2003 page 215 218 or Tetrahedron Letters 2002 43 10 1851 1854 or by analogy therewith.

A compound of the formula III wherein A is a group ii may be obtained for example as disclosed in WO 03 04450 or by analogy therewith or by analogy with the procedure described in JACS 2000 page 8837 as follows 

A compound of the formula III wherein A is a group iv may be obtained for example as disclosed in Org. Lett. 2004 Vol. 6 No. 20 3465 3467 or as follows 

A compound of the formula III wherein A is a group v may be obtained as described in SynLett 2003 page 215 218.

A compound of the formula III wherein A is a group vi may be obtained by analogy with the procedure described in Tetrahedron Lett. 2003 page 8081.

A compound of the formula III wherein A is a group vii may be obtained for example as described in Synlett 1999 No. 9 1435 1437 or by analogy therewith.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula I or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is N methyl methylsulfonylamino and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III wherein A is a group i as set out hereinbefore wherein Pand Pare independently selected from hydrogen or a hydroxy protecting group or Ptogether with Pform a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group and particularly wherein Pand Pform together a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group and especially wherein Pand Pcomplete a group a defined herein wherein Ry and Rz are both methyl i.e. an acetonide protecting group and Ris a carboxy protecting group such as 1 4C alkyl and particularly tert butyl in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base as described above whereafter the protecting groups P Pand Rare removed in any order whereafter when the product is obtained as the free acid optionally forming a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of the compound of formula I or when the product is obtained as a pharmaceutically acceptable salt optionally converting the product to a different pharmaceutically acceptable salt. A further embodiment of this process comprises wherein a compound of the formula II is used in which X is N methyl methylsulfonylamino and L is bromo. A further embodiment comprises wherein the latter compound is obtained from 5 bromo 2 hydroxy 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine for example by tosylation such as by reaction with tosyl chloride or chlorination such as by reaction with phosphorus oxychloride followed by reaction with N methylmethanesulfonamide under basic conditions for example in the presence of sodium hydride . A further embodiment comprises wherein the 5 bromo 2 hydroxy 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine is obtained from 2 hydroxy 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine for example by bromination with N bromosuccinimide in DMF . A further embodiment comprises wherein the 2 hydroxy 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine is obtained from 1 4 fluorophenyl 4 methylpentane 1 3 dione for example by reaction with urea under acidic conditions . A further embodiment comprises wherein the latter compound is obtained from an 1 4C alkyl 4 fluorobenzoate for example by reaction with 3 methyl 2 butanone in the presence of a base such as potassium tert butoxide . A further embodiment comprises wherein the protecting groups Pand Pare removed prior to removal of R.

Conversion of a compound of formula I obtained in the free acid form into a pharmaceutically acceptable salt form may be carried out using any of the procedures well known in the art for the formation of salts from carboxylic acids. Conversion of a compound of the formula I obtained in a salt form may be converted into a different pharmaceutically acceptable salt using any of the procedures will known in the art for the interconversion of salts for example conversion of the sodium salt to the calcium salt by treatment with a water soluble calcium salt such as calcium chloride or calcium acetate under aqueous conditions for example as disclosed in EP 521471 WO 00 49014 WO 04 52867 and WO 04 108691 . It will be appreciated that the conversion of the free acid to a salt or a salt to an alternative salt may be carried out in situ that is without prior isolation of the free acid or initial salt form and may involve one or more conventional steps for example as illustrated in the examples or in the references given above .

A further aspect of the present invention comprises a process for the manufacture of a compound of the formula IV

A further aspect of the present invention comprises a process for the manufacture of a compound of the formula IV wherein Pand Pare independently hydroxy protecting groups or Ptogether with Pform a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group X is a group Y as defined above and Ris a carboxy protecting group comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is a group Y as defined above and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III wherein A is a group i as set out hereinbefore wherein Pand Pare independently hydroxy protecting groups or Ptogether with Pform a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group and particularly wherein Pand Pform together a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group and especially wherein Pand Pcomplete a group a defined herein wherein Ry and Rz are both methyl i.e. an acetonide protecting group and Ris a carboxy protecting group such as 1 4C alkyl and particularly tert butyl in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base as described above. Further separate independent embodiments of this process comprise the manufacture of compounds of the formula IV using a compound of the formula II wherein 

 vi X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . The compounds of formula IV may be converted into a compound of formula I by removal of the protecting groups P Pand Ras described herein. In a particular embodiment Pand Pare removed before R.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises a novel compound of the formula IV wherein X is a group Y as defined herein Pand Pare independently hydroxy protecting groups or Ptogether with Pform a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group and Ris a carboxy protecting group. In particular a compound of the formula IV wherein X is hydroxy chloro bromo iodo amino methylamino benzylamino N benzylmethanesulfonylamino RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl aryl or substituted aryl or RC O O wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl aryl or substituted aryl and Ptogether with Pare independently selected from hydrogen or a hydroxy protecting group or Ptogether with Pform a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group and Ris 1 4C alkyl.

Within this group of compounds further particular independent groups of compounds are those in which i X is hydroxy ii X is chloro iii X is amino iv X is methylamino v X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . Particular compounds of formula IV include for example wherein 1 X is hydroxy Pand Ptaken together form an acetonide C CH protecting group and Ris 1 4C alkyl especially tert butyl 2 X is chloro Pand Ptaken together form an acetonide C CH protecting group and Ris 1 4C alkyl especially tert butyl 3 X is amino Pand Ptaken together form an acetonide C CH protecting group and Ris 1 4C alkyl especially tert butyl 4 X is methylamino Pand Ptaken together form an acetonide C CH protecting group and Ris 1 4C alkyl especially tert butyl and 5 X is tosyloxy Pand Ptaken together form an acetonide C CH protecting group and Ris 1 4C alkyl especially tert butyl

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula V wherein Pis a hydroxy protecting group X is a group Y as defined above and Ris a carboxy protecting group comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is the group Y as defined herein and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III in which A is a group ii as set out hereinbefore wherein Pis a hydroxy protecting group and Ris a carboxy protecting group in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base. Further separate independent embodiments of this process comprise the manufacture of compounds of the formula V using a compound of the formula II wherein 

 vi X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . The compounds of formula V may be converted into a compound of formula I by converting the group Y into the group Z followed by carrying out in any order the steps of 1 asymmetric reduction of the carbonyl group adjacent to the carbon carbon double bond 2 removal of P and removal of the carboxy protecting group R as described herein. In a particular embodiment the asymmetric reduction is carried out before removal of the protecting groups.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula VI wherein P P Pand Pare independently hydroxy protecting groups or Ptogether with Por Ptogether with Pform a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group and X is a group Y as defined herein comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is a group Y as defined above and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III in which A is a group iii as set out hereinbefore wherein P P Pand Pare independently hydroxy protecting groups or Ptogether with Por Ptogether with Pform a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base as described above. Further separate independent embodiments of this process comprise the manufacture of compounds of the formula VI using a compound of the formula II wherein 

 vi X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . The compounds of formula VI may be converted into a compound of formula I by converting the group Y into the group Z followed by carrying out in any order the removal of P P Pand P as described herein.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula VII wherein Pis a hydroxy protecting group X is a group Y as defined above and Ris a carboxy protecting group comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is a group Y and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III in which A is a group iv as set out hereinbefore wherein Pis a hydroxy protecting group and Ris a carboxy protecting group in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base. Further separate independent embodiments of this process comprise the manufacture of compounds of the formula VII using a compound of the formula II wherein 

 vi X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . The compounds of formula VII may be converted into a compound of formula I by converting the group Y into the group Z followed by carrying out in any order the steps of 1 removal of P 2 asymmetric hydration of the carbon carbon double bond adjacent to the ester group COOR and 3 removal of R as described herein. In a particular embodiment the asymmetric hydration is carried out before Pand Rare removed.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula VIII

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula VIII wherein Pis hydrogen or a hydroxy protecting group and X is a group Y as defined above comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is a group Y and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III in which A is a group v as set out hereinbefore wherein Pis a hydroxy protecting group in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base. Further separate independent embodiments of this process comprise the manufacture of compounds of the formula VIII using a compound of the formula II wherein 

 vi X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . The compounds of formula VIII may be converted into a compound of formula I by converting the group Y into the group Z followed by carrying out in any order the steps of 1 removal of the protecting group Pif present and 2 ring opening by hydrolysis under basic conditions as described herein. In a particular embodiment Pis a hydroxy protecting group.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula IX wherein X is a group Y as defined above comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is a group Y and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III in which A is a group vi as set out hereinbefore in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base. Further separate independent embodiments of this process comprise the manufacture of compounds of the formula IX using a compound of the formula II wherein 

 vi X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . The compounds of formula IX may be converted into a compound of formula I by converting the group Y into the group Z followed by carrying out in any order the steps of as 1 asymmetric hydration of the ring carbon carbon double bond and 2 hydrolysis under basic conditions as described herein. In a particular embodiment the asymmetric hydration is carried out prior to hydrolysis.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises the manufacture of a compound of the formula X wherein Pand Pare independently selected from hydrogen and a hydroxy protecting group or Ptogether with P or Ptogether with R form a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group X is the group Y as defined herein and Ris a carboxy protecting group comprising reaction of a compound of the formula II wherein X is a group Y as defined above and L is a leaving group with a compound of the formula III in which A is a group vii as set out hereinbefore wherein Pand Pare independently selected from hydrogen and a hydroxy protecting group or Ptogether with P or Ptogether with R form a 1 3 dihydroxy protecting group in the presence of a catalytically effective amount of a palladium catalyst and in the presence of a base. Further separate independent embodiments of this process comprise the manufacture of compounds of the formula X using a compound of the formula II wherein 

 vi X is RSOO wherein Ris 1 6C alkyl such as methyl ethyl or propyl aryl such as phenyl or substituted aryl such as tolyl . The compounds of formula X may be converted into a compound of formula I by converting the group Y into the group Z followed by carrying out in any order the steps of 1 asymmetric reduction of the carbon carbon adjacent to the group COOR 2 removal of the protecting groups as described herein. In a particular embodiment Pis hydrogen.

Further independent embodiments of the invention comprise any of the processes described above wherein the starting material of formula II is obtained from a compound of the formula XI.

A further aspect of the present invention comprises novel compounds of the formula II. Particular novel compounds of formula II include for example 

A further aspect of the present invention comprises novel starting materials for obtaining compounds of the formula II including for example 2 hydroxy 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine formula XI .

A still further aspect of the invention comprises a process for the production of 2 hydroxy 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine said process comprising

a reaction of ethyl 4 fluorobenzoate with 3 methyl 2 butanone in toluene to give 1 4 fluorophenyl 4 methylpentane 1 3 dione as a solution in toluene and

Advantageously the above process which starts from simple starting materials efficiently avoids the need to isolate the intermediate 1 4 fluorophenyl 4 methylpentane 1 3 dione because toluene is present as a solvent in both steps. The second step is generally carried out at elevated temperatures for example at about 80 . Suitable conditions for carrying out this process are as illustrated in the accompanying examples.

A mixture of N 5 bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 yl N methylmethanesulfonamide 1.00 g 2.50 mmol bis tri tert butylphosphine palladium 0 131 mg 0.250 mmol tert butyl 2 4R 6S 2 2 dimethyl 6 vinyl 1 3 dioxan 4 yl acetate 640 mg 2.50 mmol water 5 mL N N dicyclohexylmethylamine 0.530 mL 2.50 mmol and N N dimethylformamide 5 mL was heated and stirred at 50 C. under nitrogen for four days. The mixture was then diluted with ethyl acetate 11 mL water 10 mL and acetic acid 0.2 mL . The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase was extracted with ethyl acetate 5 mL . The combined organic phases were washed with water 10 mL then brine 10 mL and concentrated in vacuo to give a yellow oil containing some solids. This material was adsorbed onto silica gel through dissolution in ethyl acetate then purified by flash chromatography 5 ethyl acetate in isohexane gradually increasing to 20 ethyl acetate in hexane silica column 25 mm in diameter and 250 mm in height to yield tert butyl 2 4R 6S 6 E 2 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 N methylmethanesulfonamido pyrimidin 5 yl vinyl 2 2 dimethyl 1 3 dioxan 4 yl acetate of the formula

The compound BEM can then be converted into rosuvastatin calcium as described in International Patent Application Publication No. WO 00 49014 incorporated herein in full by reference as follows 

A mixture of BEM 5.0 g and acetonitrile 35 ml was stirred under an inert atmosphere at 40 C. 0.02M hydrochloric acid 9.5 ml was added over 30 minutes to the resultant solution maintaining the temperature at 35 C. to 42 C. The mixture was stirred at 40 C. for 3 hours then cooled to 25 C. 1.0M sodium hydroxide solution 9.5 ml was added with stirring at 25 C. and the mixture was stirred for an additional one hour at 25 C. Sodium chloride 4.7 g was added and the mixture was cooled to 5 C. over one hour. Sufficient of a solution of 1M hydrochloric acid 9.5 ml and sodium chloride 2.4 g was added at 5 C. to achieve a pH of 3.4 to 4.0 and the mixture stirred at this temperature for 5 minutes. The mixture was allowed to settle for 10 minutes at 5 C. to give two layers. The lower layer was separated and discarded. Acetonitrile 65 ml at 5 C. was added to the remaining solution and the mixture was filtered through a filter agent. 40 methylamine solution in water 1.1 ml was added at 5 C. and the mixture was warmed to 30 C. over 40 minutes and maintained at this temperature for 90 minutes. The mixture was then cooled to 0 C. over 40 minutes and maintained at this temperature for 90 minutes. The resultant solid was collected by filtration and washed with acetonitrile 2 12 ml . The solid which is the methylamine salt of the compound of formula IV R MeNH was dried under vacuum at 35 C. 3.87 g . 8 w w aqueous sodium hydroxide 5.44 ml was added to a stirred mixture of the methylamine salt 6.0 g in degassed water 30 ml at 20 C. and the mixture was stirred for one hour. The mixture was filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure at 40 C. until 24 ml of distillate collected. Water 24 ml was added and the mixture again concentrated under reduced pressure at 40 C. until 24 ml of distillate collected. Water 30 ml was added and a solution of calcium chloride dihydrate 1.03 g in water 6 ml was added dropwise at 20 C. The mixture was stirred for 45 minutes and the resultant solid filtered. The solid was washed with water 36 ml and dried under vacuum at 40 C. to give the calcium salt of E 7 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 methyl methylsulfonyl amino pyrimidin 5 yl 3R 5S 3 5 dihydroxyhept 6 enoic acid.

Alternatively the compound BEM may be converted into rosuvastatin calcium as described in International Patent Application WO 04 108691 incorporated herein in full by reference as follows BEM 20.0 g was dissolved in acetonitrile 140 ml at 40 C. then cooled to 35 C. before gradual addition of hydrochloric acid 0.02M 35 ml at 35 C. The resulting solution was stirred at 35 C. until the reaction was complete then cooled to 25 C. Sodium hydroxide 1.0M 38 ml was added at 25 C. and the resulting mixture stirred at this temperature until the reaction was complete. Aqueous hydrochloric acid 1M was added to adjust the pH of the solution to pH9. The solution was distilled under reduced pressure 52 mBar 40 C. until approximately 100 ml of acetonitrile water had been removed. Water 100 ml was added and distillation continued until a further 100 ml of acetonitrile water had been removed. The resulting mixture was filtered through a filter pad the filter washed with water 30 ml and the filtrates heated to 40 C. before addition of a solution of calcium chloride dihydrate 3.07 g in water 29.5 ml over 20 min maintaining the reaction mixture at 38 41 C.

The reaction mixture was stirred for a further 15 min at 40 C. then cooled to 20 C. and stirred at this temperature for a further 15 min. The resulting suspension was filtered washed with water 3 50 ml and dried to give E 7 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 methyl methylsulfonyl amino pyrimidin 5 yl 3R 5S 3 5 dihydroxyhept 6 enoic acid calcium salt 15.8 g 84 yield 

BEM 20.0 g was dissolved in acetonitrile 140 ml at 40 C. then cooled to 35 C. before gradual addition of hydrochloric acid 0.02M 35 ml at 35 C. The resulting solution was stirred at 35 C. until the reaction was complete then cooled to 25 C. Further acetonitrile 8 ml was added before sodium hydroxide 1.0M 38 ml was added at 25 C. and the resulting mixture stirred at this temperature until the reaction was complete. Aqueous hydrochloric acid 0.1M was added to adjust the pH of the solution to approximately pH10.5. Water was added so that the combined volume of water and hydrochloric acid 0.1M from the previous pH adjustment step added was 100 ml. Toluene 125 ml was then added and the mixture stirred at 40 C. for 30 minutes before it was allowed to settle for 1 hour at 40 C. The aqueous phase was then separated from the organic phase at 40 C. The aqueous phase was distilled under reduced pressure 53 mBar 40 C. until the volume was reduced to 135 ml. The resulting aqueous solution was filtered through a filter pad and the filter washed with water and combined with the aqueous reaction solution such that the total volume of the resulting aqueous solution was 170 ml. This solution was heated to 40 C. before addition of a solution of calcium chloride di hydrate 3.05 g in water 29.5 ml over 20 min maintaining the reaction mixture at 38 41 C.

The reaction mixture was stirred for a further 15 min at 40 C. then cooled to 20 C. and stirred at this temperature for a further 15 min. The resulting suspension was filtered washed with water 3 53 ml and dried to give E 7 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropyl 2 methyl methylsulfonyl amino pyrimidin 5 yl 3R 5S 3 5 dihydroxyhept 6 enoic acid calcium salt 14.7 g 100 strength 85 yield .

The starting material N 5 bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 yl N methylmethanesulfonamide was obtained as follows 

 i A 5M to 6M solution of hydrogen chloride in isopropanol 38 mL 194 mmoles was added to a stirred mixture of urea 7.78 g 129.6 mmoles and 1 4 fluorophenyl 4 methylpentane 1 3 dione 8.43 g 32.4 mmoles in ethanol 49 mL . The reaction mixture was refluxed for 40 hours and then cooled to 6 C. The resultant precipitate was collected by filtration and washed with diethyl ether 20 mL . The solid was added to water 60 mL and saturated aqueous sodium bicarbonate solution 10 mL . Further solid sodium bicarbonate 16.4 g 195 mmoles was added portionwise. The mixture was diluted with acetone 40 mL and ethyl acetate 80 mL . The organic phase was separated and aqueous phase was extracted 2 1 ethyl acetate acetone 3 120 mL . The organic phases were combined washed with brine 30 mL dried with anhydrous magnesium sulfate and concentrated in vacuo to yield 4.8 g of 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 64 yield H NMR 400 MHz CDCl TMS 1.41 6H d J 6.90 Hz 3.08 1H m 6.69 1H s 7.17 2H dd J 8.60 Hz J 8.60 Hz 8.14 2H dd J 6.65 Hz J 6.65 Hz 13.57 1H br. s . Mp 215 217 C. HRMS calculated for CHNOF. 232.1012 found 232.0963 used in subsequent reaction without further purification. ii N Bromosuccinimide 3.504 g 19.69 mmoles was added to suspension of 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 4.573 g 19.69 mmoles in DMF 30 mL at 8.5 C. The mixture was stirred for 10 minutes and the reaction mixture was allowed to warm to ambient temperature. The mixture was stirred for 4 hours and then diluted with ethyl acetate 80 mL toluene 20 mL and water 100 mL . The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase extracted with 4 1 ethyl acetate toluene 2 100 mL . The organic phases were combined and diluted with acetone 100 mL . The solution was washed with brine 75 mL followed by saturated aqueous sodium bicarbonate 40 mL and then concentrated in vacuo with 3 40 mL toluene azeotropes to yield 6.031 g of 5 bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 98 yield H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 6 TMS 1.39 6H d J 6.90 Hz 3.57 1H m 7.16 2H dd J 8.60 Hz J 8.60 Hz 7.66 2H dd J 8.70 Hz J 5.40 Hz . Mp Decomposes at 199 C. HRMS calculated for CHNOFBr 310.0117 found 310.0116 used in subsequent reaction without further purification. iii Phosphoryl chloride 5.00 mL 53.8 mmoles was added to 5 bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 5.027 g 15.28 mmoles and the reaction mixture was heated to an internal temperature of 90 C. The mixture was then stirred for 150 minutes at this temperature then allowed to cool to 25 C. The reaction mixture was quenched by dropwise addition with 30 mL of EtOAc rinses into a stirred mixture of ice 60 g water 40 mL and sodium bicarbonate 10 g . After completion of the addition sodium bicarbonate 13 g added to assure neutrality. The mixture was then extracted with ethyl acetate 4 70 mL . The organic phases were combined and dried with anhydrous magnesium sulphate. The solution was filtered through a pad of diatomaceous earth and concentrated in vacuo to yield 5 bromo 2 chloro 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine 4.98 g 99 yield H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 6 TMS 1.34 6H d J 6.70 Hz 3.64 1H m 7.17 2H dd J 8.65 Hz J 8.65 Hz 7.73 2H dd J 8.80 Hz J 5.20 Hz . Mp 99 101 C. HRMS calculated for CHNFClBr 327.9778 found 327.9752 used in subsequent reaction without further purification. iv Sodium hydride 1.20 g 30.0 mmol 60 suspension in mineral oil was washed with hexane 2 10 mL and DMF 50 mL was then added followed by 5 bromo 2 chloro 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidine 4.944 g 15.0 mmoles . The resulting suspension was cooled to 7 C. and N methylmethanesulfonamide 2.585 g 22.5 mmoles was added washed in with DMF 10 mL . The mixture was stirred for 17.5 hours then diluted with ethyl acetate 80 mL toluene 100 mL and water 120 mL . The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase was extracted with a mixture of ethyl acetate 20 mL and toluene 30 mL . The organic phases were combined washed with water 2 40 mL and then brine 20 mL and dried over anhydrous magnesium sulphate. The solution was concentrated in vacuo with two 20 mL hexane azeotropes to yield N 5 bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 yl N methylmethanesulfonamide 5.50 g 91 yield H NMR 400 MHz CDCl TMS 1.32 6H d J 6.60 Hz 3.49 3H s 3.55 3H s 3.63 1H m 7.16 2H dd J 8.65 Hz J 8.65 Hz 7.77 2H dd J 8.70 Hz J 5.30 Hz . Mp 122 125 C. HRMS calculated for CHNOFSBr 401.0209 found 401.0225 used in subsequent reaction without further purification.

An alternative route to N 5 bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 yl N methylmethanesulfonamide is as follows 

The reactor used for this experiment was thoroughly dried by carrying out a toluene distillation prior to use. Fresh toluene 100 mL and potassium tert butoxide 7.50 g 64.8 mmol were charged to the vessel and stirred to form a slurry. The mixture was cooled to 9 C. and 3 methyl 2 butanone 3.63 g 41.7 mmol added. The mixture was warmed to 5 C. and stirred for 30 mins. Ethyl 4 fluorobenzoate 6.25 g 36.8 mmol was dissolved in toluene 4 mL and added via a syringe followed by a small toluene 1 ml line wash. The mixture was stirred for 10 minutes at 0 C. warmed to 10 C. and then stirred at this temperature overnight. The mobile slurry was warmed to 25 C. and acetic acid 4.4 mL added followed by water 37.5 mL . The mixture was stirred thoroughly for 5 minutes and then allowed to stand. The lower phase was run off and discarded. A 5 sodium bicarbonate solution 16 mL was charged to the upper phase stirred for 5 minutes and then allowed to stand. The lower aqueous layer was run off and the upper organic phase washed twice with water 5 mL .

The remaining toluene solution was dried by azeotropic distillation refluxing with Dean Stark trap in place and the solution cooled to 60 C. Urea 5.1 g 84.9 mmol and isopropanol 20 mL were charged and stirred vigorously during the addition of hydrochloric acid 5 to 6 M in isopropanol 32.3 mL 183 mmol . The solution was heated to 80 C. and stirred for 48.5 hours before charging more hydrochloric acid in isopropanol 2 mL 11 mmol . After a total of 112 hours at 80 C. the mixture was cooled to 60 C. and water 50 mL added. After stirring for 15 minutes the mixture was allowed to stand and the lower aqueous phase run off and retained. The aqueous phase was stirred and sodium hydrogen carbonate 6.9 g added portion wise until pH 7. The product crystallised from solution and was then cooled to 20 C. The solid was filtered off and washed twice with water 20 mL and dried in a vacuum oven at 50 C. overnight. 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 4.92 g was isolated as a white powder in 56 overall yield H NMR 400 MHz CDCl 1.41 6H d 3.08 1H m 6.69 1H s 7.17 2H dd 8.14 2H dd 13.57 1H br. s . Mp 215 217 C. HRMS calculated for CHNOF 232.1012 found 232.0963 used in subsequent reaction without further purification.

4 4 Fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 8.00 g 34.1 mmol was charged to a reactor followed by DMF 100 mL . The suspension was stirred cooled to 3 C. and N bromosuccinimide 6.25 g 34.8 mmol added. The reaction mixture was warmed to 20 C. and stirred overnight. Water 100 mL was charged to the reaction mixture and the crystalline mixture stirred for 1 hour before filtering off. The isolated solid was washed twice with water 25 mL and the solid dried in a vacuum oven at 50 C. 5 Bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 10.45 g 97 yield was obtained as a white solid 

5 Bromo 4 4 fluorophenyl 6 isopropylpyrimidin 2 ol 62.2 g 199 mmol potassium carbonate 35.83 g 259 mmol and butyl acetate 435.4 mL were charged to a 2 L multi neck flask and stirred heated to 42 C. p Toluenesulfonyl chloride 41.83 g 219 mmol was then added in portions over 50 minutes maintaining the temperature at 45 C. The reaction was stirred at this temp for 2.5 hours at which point LCMS showed only the desired intermediate MH 467 present. Potassium carbonate 41.25 g 299 mmol and butyl acetate 186.6 mL were then added and reaction heated to 120 C. Once at this temperature N methylmethanesulfonamide 28.21 g 259 mmol was added over 30 mins. The reaction was held at this temperature for 18 hours then butyl acetate 330 mL and water 412 mL were added reducing the reaction temperature to 75 C. Stirring was continued at this temperature for 20 minutes then the reaction mixture was transferred to a separating funnel and allowed to stand for 10 mins to separate. The aqueous layer was separated off and re extracted with butyl acetate 250 mL by stirring at 60 C. for 15 mins. The organic layers were combined and 1 M aqueous NaOH 330 mL added. This mixture was stirred at 60 C. for 20 minutes then the lower aqueous phase separated off. The organic layer was concentrated in vacuo to 20 original volume then allowed to cool and crystallize. The crude solid was isolated by filtration 50.5 g slightly damp and this material recrystallized from methanol 500 mL filtered and dried at 50 C. to constant weight to give the title compound 30.54 g 38 yield as a white crystalline solid.

