---

title: Methods of fabricating transistors having buried p-type layers beneath the source region
abstract: The present invention provides a unit cell of a metal-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MESFET). The unit cell of the MESFET includes a source, a drain and a gate. The gate is disposed between the source and the drain and on an n-type conductivity channel layer. A p-type conductivity region is provided beneath the source and has an end that extends towards the drain. The p-type conductivity region is spaced apart from the n-type conductivity channel region and is electrically coupled to the source.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07297580&OS=07297580&RS=07297580
owner: Cree, Inc.
number: 07297580
owner_city: Durham
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050601
---
The present application is a divisional of and claims priority from U. S. application Ser. No. 10 304 272 filed Nov. 26 2002 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 956 239 entitled TRANSISTORS HAVING BURIED P TYPE LAYERS BENEATH THE SOURCE REGION which is assigned to the assignee of the present application the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set forth fully.

The present invention was made at least in part with support from the Department of the Navy contract number N39997 99 C 3761. The Government may have certain rights in this invention.

The present invention relates to microelectronic devices and more particularly to transistors for example metal semiconductor field effect transistors MESFETs .

Electrical circuits requiring high power handling capability 20 watts while operating at high frequencies such as radio frequencies 500 MHz S band 3 GHz and X band 10 GHz have in recent years become more prevalent. Because of the increase in high power high frequency circuits there has been a corresponding increase in demand for transistors that are capable of reliably operating at radio frequencies and above while still being capable of handling higher power loads. Previously bipolar transistors and power metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors MOSFETs have been used for high power applications but the power handling capability of such devices may be limited at higher operating frequencies. Junction field effect transistors JFETs were commonly used for high frequency applications but the power handling capability of previously known JFETs may also be limited.

Recently metal semiconductor field effect transistors MESFETs have been developed for high frequency applications. The MESFET construction may be preferable for high frequency applications because only majority carriers carry current. The MESFET design may be preferred over current MOSFET designs because the reduced gate capacitance permits faster switching times of the gate input. Therefore although all field effect transistors utilize only majority carriers to carry current the Schottky gate structure of the MESFET may make the MESFET more desirable for high frequency applications.

In addition to the type of structure and perhaps more fundamentally the characteristics of the semiconductor material from which a transistor is formed also affects the operating parameters. Of the characteristics that affect a transistor s operating parameters the electron mobility saturated electron drift velocity electric breakdown field and thermal conductivity may have the greatest effect on a transistor s high frequency and high power characteristics.

Electron mobility is the measurement of how rapidly an electron is accelerated to its saturated velocity in the presence of an electric field. In the past semiconductor materials which have a high electron mobility were preferred because more current could be developed with a lesser field resulting in faster response times when a field is applied. Saturated electron drift velocity is the maximum velocity that an electron can obtain in the semiconductor material. Materials with higher saturated electron drift velocities are preferred for high frequency applications because the higher velocity translates to shorter times from source to drain.

Electric breakdown field is the field strength at which breakdown of the Schottky junction and the current through the gate of the device suddenly increases. A high electric breakdown field material is preferred for high power high frequency transistors because larger electric fields generally can be supported by a given dimension of material. Larger electric fields allow for faster transients as the electrons can be accelerated more quickly by larger electric fields than by smaller.

Thermal conductivity is the ability of the semiconductor material to dissipate heat. In typical operations all transistors generate heat. In turn high power and high frequency transistors usually generate larger amounts of heat than small signal transistors. As the temperature of the semiconductor material increases the junction leakage currents generally increase and the current through the field effect transistor generally decreases due to a decrease in carrier mobility with an increase in temperature. Therefore if the heat is dissipated from the semiconductor the material will remain at a lower temperature and be capable of carrying larger currents with lower leakage currents.

In the past high frequency MESFETs have been manufactured of n type III V compounds such as gallium arsenide GaAs because of their high electron mobilities. Although these devices provided increased operating frequencies and moderately increased power handling capability the relatively low breakdown voltage and the lower thermal conductivity of these materials have limited their usefulness in high power applications.

Silicon carbide SiC has been known for many years to have excellent physical and electronic properties which should theoretically allow production of electronic devices that can operate at higher temperatures higher power and higher frequency than devices produced from silicon Si or GaAs. The high electric breakdown field of about 4 10V cm high saturated electron drift velocity of about 2.0 10cm sec and high thermal conductivity of about 4.9 W cm K. indicate that SiC would be suitable for high frequency high power applications. Unfortunately difficulty in manufacturing has limited the usefulness of SiC for high power and high frequency applications.

MESFETs have been produced having channel layers of silicon carbide have been produced on silicon substrates See e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 4 762 806 to Suzuki et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 4 757 028 to Kondoh et al. . Because the semiconductor layers of a MESFET are epitaxial the layer upon which each epitaxial layer is grown affects the characteristics of the device. Thus a SiC epitaxial layer grown on a Si substrate generally has different electrical and thermal characteristics then a SiC epitaxial layer grown on a different substrate. Although the SiC on Si substrate devices described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 762 806 and 4 757 028 may have exhibited improved thermal characteristics the use of a Si substrate generally limits the ability of such devices to dissipate heat. Furthermore the growth of SiC on Si generally results in defects in the epitaxial layers that result in high leakage current when the device is in operation.

Other MESFETs have been developed using SiC substrates. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 07 540 488 filed Jun. 19 1990 and now abandoned the disclosure of which is incorporated entirely herein by reference describes a SiC MESFET having epitaxial layers of SiC grown on a SiC substrate. These devices exhibited improved thermal characteristics over previous devices because of the improved crystal quality of the epitaxial layers grown on SiC substrates. However to obtain high power and high frequency it may be necessary to overcome the limitations of SiC s lower electron mobility.

Similarly commonly assigned U.S. Pat. No. 5 270 554 to Palmour describes a SiC MESFET having source and drain contacts formed on n regions of SiC and an optional lightly doped epitaxial layer between the substrate and the n type layer in which the channel is formed. U.S. Pat. No. 5 925 895 to Sriram et al. also describes a SiC MESFET and a structure that is described as overcoming surface effects which may reduce the performance of the MESFET for high frequency operation. Sriram et al. also describes SiC MESFETs which use n source and drain contact regions as well as a p type buffer layer.

Furthermore conventional SiC FET structures may provide the constant characteristics during the entire operating range of the FET i.e. from fully open channel to near pinch off voltage by using a very thin highly doped channel a delta doped channel offset from the gate by a lightly doped region of similar conductivity type. Delta doped channels are discussed in detail in an article by Yokogawa et al. entitled MRS Fall Symposium 2000 and an article by Konstantinov et al. entitled MRS Fall Symposium 2000. However further improvements may be made in SiC MESFETs.

For example it may be important that SiC MESFETs have high breakdown voltages and relatively low leakage currents if they are used in high efficiency high power high linearity radio frequency RF applications. In an attempt to provide high breakdown voltages devices have been provided having highly compensated substrates such as Vanadium doped semi insulating SiC. These devices typically provide adequate breakdown voltages as well as low leakage currents but may sacrifice device performance due to unwanted trapping effects in the substrate. Furthermore devices having highly doped p type layers under the channel of the FET have been provided and have been successful in providing good electron confinement and low leakage currents. However these devices generally contain excessive parasitics that may degrade the RF performance of the device. Accordingly further improvements may be made with respect to existing SiC FET devices such that they may provide improved breakdown voltages without sacrificing other performance characteristics of the device.

Embodiments of the present invention provide a unit cell of a metal semiconductor field effect transistor MESFET . The unit cell of the MESFET includes a MESFET having a source a drain and a gate. The gate is disposed between the source and the drain and on an n type conductivity channel layer. A p type conductivity region is provided beneath the source and has an end that extends towards the drain. The p type conductivity region is spaced apart from the n type conductivity channel layer and is electrically coupled to the source.

In some embodiments of the present invention the gate may extend into the n type conductivity channel layer. The gate may have a first sidewall and a second sidewall. The first sidewall of the gate may be associated with the source side of the gate and the second sidewall may be associated with the drain side of the gate. The p type conductivity region may extend from beneath the source to the first sidewall of the gate without extending past the first sidewall of the gate from beneath the source to the second sidewall of the gate without extending past the second sidewall of the gate or from beneath the source to between the first and second sidewalls of the gate. In some embodiments the p type conductivity region extends from beneath the source to within about 0.1 to about 0.3 m of the first sidewall on the source side of the first sidewall. In certain embodiments the p type conductivity region extends from beneath a source contact and or a source implant region without extending to beneath a drain contact. The p type conductivity region may also extend from beneath a source contact and or a source implant region without extending to beneath a drain implant region.

In further embodiments of the present invention the MESFET is a silicon carbide SiC MESFET having a SiC substrate. The p type conductivity region may be disposed on the SiC substrate. In some embodiments the p type conductivity region is in the SiC substrate. The n type conductivity channel layer may include n type conductivity SiC and the p type conductivity region may include p type conductivity SiC.

In still further embodiments of the present invention the p type conductivity region may have a carrier concentration of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cm. The n type conductivity channel layer may include a first n type conductivity channel layer and a second n type conductivity channel layer. The first n type conductivity channel layer may have a carrier concentration of about 3 10cmand the second n type conductivity channel layer may have a carrier concentration of about 1 10cm. The first n type conductivity channel layer may have a thickness of about 0.28 m and the second n type conductivity channel layer may have a thickness of about 900 . In certain embodiments of the present invention the n type conductivity channel layer includes first second and third n type conductivity channel layers. The first second and third n type conductivity channel layers may have respective first second and third carrier concentrations.

In some embodiments of the present invention the MESFET may further include a buffer layer on a SiC substrate. The p type conductivity region may be formed in the buffer layer. The p type layer may also be formed in the SiC substrate. The p type layer may extend about 0.4 m into the buffer layer or the SiC substrate.

In further embodiments of the present invention the buffer layer may have a thickness of about 2 m. The buffer layer may include p type conductivity SiC and may have a carrier concentration of from about 0.5 10cmto about 3 10cm. The buffer layer may also include n type conductivity SiC and have a carrier concentration of less than about 5 10cm. Finally the buffer layer may include undoped SiC.

In still further embodiments of the present invention the MESFET may be a gallium arsenide GaAs MESFET or a Gallium Nitride GaN MESFET. The MESFET may have a substrate that may be a GaAs or a GaN substrate. The p type conductivity region may be disposed on the GaAs or GaN substrate. The n type conductivity channel layer may include n type conductivity gallium arsenide GaAs or GaN and the p type conductivity region may include p type conductivity GaAs or GaN.

In some embodiments of the present invention the MESFET may further include first and second ohmic contacts on the n type channel layer that respectively define the source and the drain. A first recess may be provided between the source and the drain that exposes the n type channel layer. The gate may be disposed in the first recess and extend into the n type channel layer. A contact via hole may be provided adjacent the source that exposes the p type conductivity region and a third ohmic contact may be provided on the exposed p type conductivity region.

In further embodiments of the present invention a first overlayer may be provided on the second ohmic contact of the drain and a second overlayer may be provided on the first and third ohmic contacts of the source and the exposed portion of the p type conductivity region respectively. The second overlayer may electrically couple the first ohmic contact of the source and the third ohmic contact of the exposed portion of the p type conductivity region.

In still further embodiments of the present invention the MESFET may further include implanted n type conductivity regions of SiC in the n type conductivity channel layer beneath the source and the drain. The implanted n type conductivity regions of SiC may have carrier concentrations greater than a carrier concentration of the n type conductivity channel layer. The first and second ohmic contacts are disposed on the n type conductivity regions of SiC. The implanted n type conductivity regions of SiC may have carrier concentrations of about 1 10cm. The first second and third ohmic contacts may include nickel contacts.

In certain embodiments of the present invention a double recessed structure is provided for the gate. A first recess may be provided between the source and the drain that exposes the n type channel layer. The first recess may have first and second sidewalls. A second recess may be disposed between the first and second sidewalls of the first recess. The gate may be disposed in the second recess and extend into the n type conductivity channel layer.

In some embodiments of the present invention a second buffer layer may be provided between the p type conductivity region and the n type conductivity channel layer. The second buffer layer may include p type SiC and may have a carrier concentration of from about 1 10cmto about 5 10cm but is typically about 1.5 10cm. The buffer layer may have a thickness of from about 0.5 m to about 1.0 m.

In further embodiments of the present invention the n type conductivity channel layer and the second buffer layer may form a mesa having sidewalls that define the periphery of the transistor and that extend through the n type channel layer and the second buffer layer. The sidewalls of the mesa may further extend through the p type conductivity region into the substrate. An oxide layer may be formed on the n type conductivity channel layer.

In still further embodiments of the present invention the gate includes a first gate layer of chromium on the n type conductivity channel layer. The gate may further include an overlayer on the first gate layer. The overlayer may include platinum and gold. Alternatively the gate may include a first gate layer of nickel on the n type conductivity channel layer. The gate may further include an overlayer on the first gate layer. The overlayer may include gold. The gate may also be disposed in a double recessed structure having a floor that extends about 600 into the n type conductivity channel layer. The gate may be from about 0.4 m to about 0.7 m long. A distance from the source to the gate may be from about 0.5 m to about 0.7 m. A distance from the drain to the gate may be from about 1.5 m to about 2 m. In a MESFET including a plurality of unit cells a distance from a first gate to a second gate may be from about 20 m to about 50 m.

In some embodiments a unit cell of a transistor is provided. The unit cell of the transistor has a source a drain and a gate. The gate of the transistor is between the source and the drain and on a first layer of semiconductor material. A p type conductivity region is provided beneath the source and has an end that extends towards the drain. The p type conductivity region is spaced apart from the first layer of semiconductor material and is electrically coupled to the source.

In further embodiments of the present invention the gate extends into the first layer of semiconductor material. The transistor may include silicon carbide SiC transistors gallium arsenide GaAs based transistors aluminum gallium arsenide AlGaAs based transistors gallium nitride GaN based transistors and or aluminum gallium nitride AlGaN based transistors. As used herein the terms GaN based AlGaN based GaAs based or AlGaAs based refer to binary ternary and quaternary compounds such as GaN AlGaN and AlInGaN of the respective compounds. For example a GaN based transistor may include GaN regions AlGaN regions InAlGaN regions or the like.

While the present invention is described above primarily with reference to MESFETs other types of transistors as well as methods of fabricating transistors and in particular MESFETs are also provided.

The present invention will now be described with reference to the which illustrate various embodiments of the present invention. As illustrated in the Figures the sizes of layers or regions are exaggerated for illustrative purposes and thus are provided to illustrate the general structures of the present invention. Furthermore various aspects of the present invention are described with reference to a layer being formed on a substrate or other layer. As will be appreciated by those of skill in the art references to a layer being formed on another layer or substrate contemplates that additional layers may intervene. References to a layer being formed on another layer or substrate without an intervening layer are described herein as being formed directly on the layer or substrate. Furthermore relative terms such as beneath may be used herein to describe one layer or regions relationship to another layer or region as illustrated in the Figures. It will be understood that these terms are intended to encompass different orientations of the device in addition to the orientation depicted in the Figures. For example if the device in the Figures is turned over layers or regions described as beneath other layers or regions would now be oriented above these other layers or regions. The term beneath is intended to encompass both above and beneath in this situation. Like numbers refer to like elements throughout.

It will be understood that although the terms first and second are used herein to describe various regions layers and or sections these regions layers and or sections should not be limited by these terms. These terms are only used to distinguish one region layer or section from another region layer or section. Thus a first region layer or section discussed below could be termed a second region layer or section and similarly a second region layer or section may be termed a first region layer or section without departing from the teachings of the present invention.

Embodiments of the present invention will now be described in detail below with reference to that illustrate various embodiments of the present invention and various processes of fabricating embodiments of the present invention. A transistor for example a metal semiconductor field effect transistor MESFET is provided having p type conductivity regions beneath the sources of the MESFET having ends that extend towards the drains of the MESFET. As described in detail below the presence of this p type conductivity region for example p type conductivity silicon carbide SiC may provide for example devices having improved breakdown voltages without compromising other performance characteristics of the device. Improved breakdown voltages may be provided because the presence of the p type conductivity region may inhibit electron injection from the source which in turn may increase breakdown voltage. Transistors according to embodiments of the present invention may be useful in for example high efficiency linear power amplifiers such as power amplifiers for base stations using complex modulation schemes such as code division multiple access CDMA and or Wideband CDMA WCDMA .

Referring to transistors for example metal semiconductor field effect transistors MESFETs according to embodiments of the present invention will now be described in detail. As seen in a substrate is provided. The substrate may be a single crystal bulk silicon carbide SiC substrate of either p type or n type conductivity or semi insulating. The substrate of either p type or n type may be very lightly doped. The substrate may be formed of silicon carbide selected from the group of 6H 4H 15R or 3C silicon carbide. Although the present invention is described herein with reference to a SiC substrate the present invention should not be limited to SiC. For example in some embodiments the substrate may also include for example gallium arsenide GaAs and or Gallium Nitride GaN .

An optional buffer layer of for example p type silicon carbide may be provided on the substrate . The buffer layer may be formed of p type conductivity silicon carbide of 6H 4H 15R or 3C polytype. The buffer layer may for example have a carrier concentration of from about 0.5 10cmto about 3.0 10cm. Suitable dopants include aluminum boron and or gallium. The buffer layer may have a thickness of about 2.0 m. Although the buffer layer is described above as p type silicon carbide the invention should not be limited to this configuration. Alternatively the buffer layer may be undoped silicon carbide i.e. not intentionally doped or very low doped n type conductivity silicon carbide. If a very low doped n type silicon carbide is utilized for the buffer layer the carrier concentration of the buffer layer is preferably less than about 5.0 10cm.

As further illustrated in a p region is provided beneath a source of the device that has an end that extends towards the drain of the device. As used herein p or n refer to regions that are defined by higher carrier concentrations than are present in adjacent or other regions of the same or another layer or substrate. In some embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may extend from beneath a source contact and or from beneath an n source implant region without extending to beneath an n drain implant region . In further embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may extend from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region without extending to beneath a drain contact . In still further embodiments the p conductivity region may further extend from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region to the first sidewall of the gate without extending past the first sidewall of the gate from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region to the second sidewall of the gate without extending past the second sidewall of the gate or from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region to a point between the first sidewall and the second sidewall of the gate . In certain embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may extend to a point within about 0.1 to about 0.3 m of the first sidewall of the gate on the source side.

The p region is a region of p type conductivity for example p type conductivity silicon carbide. For the p region carrier concentrations of from about 1.0 10cmto about 1.0 10cmmay be suitable but carrier concentrations as high as possible are preferred. The carrier concentration may not be constant throughout the p region but it is preferable that the carrier concentration be as high as possible at the surface of the p region to facilitate the formation of ohmic contacts thereon. In some embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may be provided in the substrate as illustrated in . The p conductivity region may for example extend about 0.4 m into the buffer layer or the substrate . The presence of the p conductivity region beneath the source region may inhibit electron injection from the source thus possibly providing an improved breakdown voltage. Furthermore the fact that the p conductivity region does not extend to beneath the drain region may hinder the introduction of parasitics into the device and thus device performance may not be influenced.

The buffer layer may be disposed between the substrate and a second buffer layer . The second buffer layer may be for example p type silicon carbide having a carrier concentration of from about 1 10cmto about 5 10cm but typically about 1.5 10cm. The p type silicon carbide buffer layer may also have a thickness of from about 0.5 m to about 1.0 m. Although the second buffer layer is described above as being of p type conductivity silicon carbide it will be understood that the present invention is not limited to this configuration. Alternatively for example the second buffer layer may be of n type conductivity for example very lightly doped n type conductivity SiC or undoped SiC as discussed above with respect to buffer layer . In some embodiments of the present invention the second buffer layer may be provided directly on the substrate as illustrated in .

An n type conductivity channel layer is provided on the second buffer layer as illustrated in . The n type conductivity channel layer may be formed of n type conductivity silicon carbide of 6H 4H 15R or 3C polytype. The n type conductivity channel layer may include one or more layers of for example n type conductivity silicon carbide having different carrier concentrations. For example the n type conductivity channel layer may include a first n type conductivity channel layer and a second n type conductivity channel layer as illustrated in . Alternatively the n type conductivity channel layer may include first second and third layers of n type conductivity SiC as discussed in detail in commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 136 456 to Sriram the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in its entirety.

As further illustrated in n regions and are provided in the source and drain regions of the device respectively. Regions and are typically of n type conductivity silicon carbide and have carrier concentrations that are greater than the carrier concentration of the n type conductivity channel layer . For the n regions and carrier concentrations of about 1 10cmmay be suitable but carrier concentrations as high as possible are preferred.

Ohmic contacts and are provided on the implanted regions and respectively and are spaced apart so as to provide the source contact and the drain contact . Ohmic contact is provided on the p conductivity region to provide a p contact . The ohmic contacts and are preferably formed of nickel or other suitable metals. The p conductivity region is maintained at the same potential as the source by for example electrically coupling the p ohmic contact to the source contact . An insulator layer such as an oxide may be further provided on the exposed surface of the device.

Transistors according to certain embodiments of the present invention include a first recess and a contact via hole . The first recess is provided between first and second n regions and i.e. between the source region and the drain region. The first recess extends into the n type conductivity channel layer and exposes the n type conductivity channel layer . The contact via hole is provided adjacent the source region and exposes at least a portion of the p region .

Transistors according to embodiments of the present invention may include a double recessed structure containing first and second recesses as illustrated in . In particular a first recess has a floor that extends through the first n type conductivity channel layer to the second n type channel layer . A second recess is provided between the sidewalls of the first recess. A first sidewall of the first recess is between the source and the gate and a second sidewall of the first recess is between the drain and the gate . The floor of the second recess extends into the second n type conductivity channel layer for example a distance of about 600 . The double recessed structure is discussed further in commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 136 456 to Sriram.

Referring again to the gate contact may be provided in the first recess between the source region and the drain region . In embodiments of the present invention having a double recessed structure as discussed above the gate may be disposed in the second recess as illustrated in . Furthermore in certain embodiments of the present invention the gate contact may be disposed on the n type conductivity channel layer as illustrated in and may not be provided in for example the first recess or the second recess .

The gate contact may be formed of chromium platinum platinum silicide nickel and or TiWN however other metals such as gold known to one skilled in the art to achieve the Schottky effect may be used. The Schottky gate contact typically has a three layer structure. Such a structure may have advantages because of the high adhesion of chromium Cr . For example the gate contact can optionally include a first gate layer of chromium Cr contacting the n type conductivity channel layer . The gate contact may further include an overlayer of platinum Pt and gold or other highly conductive metal. Alternatively the gate contact may include a first layer of nickel in the first recess on the n type conductivity channel layer . The gate contact may further include an overlayer on the first layer of nickel that includes a layer of gold.

As further illustrated in metal overlayers and may be provided on the source and p contacts and the drain contact and the gate contact respectively. The overlayers and may be gold silver aluminum platinum and or copper. Other suitable highly conductive metals may also be used for the overlayer. Furthermore the metal overlayer may electrically couple the p contact of the p region to the source contact .

In selecting the dimensions of the MESFET the width of the gate is defined as the dimension of the gate perpendicular to the flow of current. As shown in the cross section of the gate width runs into and out of the page. The length of the gate is the dimension of the gate parallel to the flow of current. As seen in the cross sectional views of the gate length is the dimension of the gate that is in contact with the n type conductivity channel layer . For example the gate length of the MESFET according to certain embodiments of the present invention may be from about 0.4 m to about 0.7 m. Another important dimension is the source to gate distance which is shown in the cross section of as the distance from the source contact or n region to the gate contact . The source to gate distance according to certain embodiments of the present invention may be from about 0.5 m to about 0.7 m. Furthermore the distance from the drain to the gate may be from about 1.5 m to about 2 m. Embodiments of the present invention may further include a plurality of unit cells of MESFETs and the distance from a first gate of the unit cells to a second gate may be for example from about 20 m to about 50 m.

If the substrate is semi insulating it may be fabricated as described in commonly assigned U.S. Pat. No. 6 218 680 to Carter et al. entitled Semi insulating Silicon Carbide Without Vanadium Domination the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference herein as if set forth in its entirety. Such a semi insulating substrate may be produced by providing silicon carbide substrates with sufficiently high levels of point defects and sufficiently matched levels of p type and n type dopants such that the resistivity of the silicon carbide substrate is dominated by the point defects. Such a domination may be accomplished by fabricating the silicon carbide substrate at elevated temperatures with source powders that have concentrations of heavy metals transition elements or other deep level trapping elements of less than about 1 10cmand preferably less than about 1.0 10cm. For example temperatures between about 2360 C. and 2380 C. with the seed being about 300 C. to about 500 C. lower may be utilized. Thus it is preferred that the semi insulating substrate be substantially free of heavy metal transition element dopants or other deep level trapping elements such as vanadium such that the resistivity of the substrate is not dominated by such heavy metals or transition elements. While it is preferred that the semi insulating substrate be free of such heavy metal transition element dopants or deep level trapping elements such elements may be present in measurable amounts while still benefiting from the teachings of the present invention if the presence of such materials does not substantially affect the electrical properties of the MESFETs described herein.

As further illustrated in a mask may be formed for implanting the p region . The p region is typically formed by ion implantation of for example aluminum boron and or gallium followed by a high temperature anneal. Suitable anneal temperatures may be from about 1300 to about 1600 C. typically about 1500 C. The ion implantation may be performed on the regions that are not covered by the mask to form p region as illustrated in . Thus the ions are implanted in portions of the buffer layer if present or the substrate to provide a highly doped region of p type conductivity for example p type conductivity silicon carbide. Once implanted the dopants are annealed to activate the implant. The highly doped region of p type conductivity may extend about 0.4 m into the buffer layer or the substrate .

As seen in a second buffer layer and an n type conductivity channel layer are grown or deposited on the buffer layer . It will be understood that if the buffer layer is not included the second buffer layer and the n type conductivity channel layer may be grown or deposited on the substrate . The second buffer layer is formed on the buffer layer and the n type conductivity channel layer is formed on the second buffer layer as illustrated in .

As illustrated in a mask may be formed for implanting n regions and . Regions and are typically formed by ion implantation of for example nitrogen N or phosphorus P followed by a high temperature anneal. Suitable anneal temperatures may be from about 1100 to about 1600 C. The ion implantation may be performed on the regions which are not covered by the mask to form n regions and as illustrated in . Thus the ions are implanted in portions of the n type conductivity channel layer to provide highly doped regions of n type conductivity for example n type conductivity SiC having higher carrier concentrations than the n type conductivity channel layer . Once implanted the dopants are annealed to activate the implant.

As seen in the substrate the buffer layer the p region the second buffer layer and the n type conductivity channel layer may be etched to form an isolation mesa. The mesa has sidewalls defined by the substrate the buffer layer the p region the second buffer layer and the n type conductivity channel layer that define the periphery of the transistor. The sidewalls of the mesa extend downward past the p conductivity region . The mesa may be formed to extend into the substrate of the device as shown in . The mesa may extend past the depletion region of the device to confine current flow in the device to the mesa and reduce the capacitance of the device. The mesa is preferably formed by reactive ion etching the above described device however other methods known to one skilled in the art may be used to form the mesa. Furthermore if a mesa is not utilized the device may be isolated using other methods such as proton bombardment counterdoping with compensating atoms or other methods known to those skilled in the art.

In certain embodiments only the second buffer layer and the n type conductivity channel layer may be etched to form an isolation mesa as shown in . In these embodiments the sidewalls are defined by the second buffer layer and the n type conductivity channel layer which define the periphery of the transistor.

As discussed above embodiments of the present invention may include a double recessed structure instead of the single recess . As illustrated in a first recess of the double recessed structure may be formed by forming a mask for the first recess and etching through the first n type conductivity channel layer to form the first recess according to the mask. An insulation layer may be formed after the first recess has been formed. After forming the ohmic contacts as illustrated in a second recess of the double recessed structure may be formed by forming a second mask for the second recess and etching the recess according to the mask. The second n type conductivity channel layer may be etched into a distance of for example about 600 to form the second recess . Methods of fabricating the double recessed structure are discussed further in commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 136 456 to Sriram.

As illustrated in contact windows may be etched through the insulator layer to the n regions and . A third contact window may be etched in the insulator layer above the highly doped p region . Nickel may then be evaporated to deposit the source and drain contacts and respectively. The nickel may be annealed to form the ohmic contacts and as illustrated in . Such a deposition and annealing process may be carried out utilizing conventional techniques known to those of skill in the art. For example the ohmic contacts and may be annealed at a temperature of from about 950 C. to about 1100 C. for about 2 minutes. However other times and temperatures may also be utilized. Times from about 30 seconds to about 10 minutes may be for example acceptable.

As illustrated in a contact via hole of the MESFET may be formed. The contact via hole may be etched in the portion of the MESFET defined by window in the insulator layer . The n type conductivity channel layer and the second buffer layer may be etched through to expose the p conductivity region to form the contact via hole . The etching process may be for example a dry or wet etch process. As further illustrated in nickel may be evaporated to deposit the p contact . The nickel may be annealed to form the ohmic contact . Such a deposition and annealing process may be carried out utilizing conventional techniques known to those of skill in the art. For example the ohmic contact may be annealed at a temperature of from about 600 C. to about 1050 C.

Referring now to a cross sectional view of a transistor according to further embodiments of the present invention will be discussed. Like numbers refer to like elements in previously described figures thus detailed descriptions of these elements will be omitted. As seen in a substrate is provided. The substrate may be for example SiC GaAs or GaN. A p region is provided beneath a source of the device and has an end that extends towards the drain of the device. In some embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may extend from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region extending to beneath the n drain implant region . In further embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may extend from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region without extending to beneath the drain contact . In embodiments of the present invention illustrated in the p conductivity region is provided in the substrate .

A second buffer layer is provided on the substrate and the p conductivity region . An n type conductivity channel layer is provided on the second buffer layer . The n regions and are provided in the source and drain regions of the device respectively. Ohmic contacts and are provided on the implanted regions and respectively and are spaced apart so as to provide the source contact and the drain contact . Ohmic contact is provided on the p conductivity region to provide a p contact . The p conductivity region is maintained at the same potential as the source by for example electrically coupling the p ohmic contact to the source contact . An insulator layer such as an oxide is further provided on the exposed surface of the device.

A first recess is provided between first and second n regions and i.e. between the source region and the drain region. The first recess extends into the n type conductivity channel layer and exposes the n type conductivity channel layer . A contact via hole is provided adjacent the source region and exposes at least a portion of the p region. The gate contact is provided in the first recess between the source region and the drain region . As further illustrated in FIG. metal overlayers and may be provided on the source and p contacts and the drain contact and the gate contact respectively. Furthermore metal overlayer may electrically couple the p contact of the p region to the source contact .

Referring now to a cross sectional view of a transistor according to further embodiments of the present invention will be discussed. Like numbers refer to like elements in previously described figures thus detailed descriptions of these elements will be omitted. As seen in a substrate is provided. The substrate may be for example SiC GaAs or GaN. A p region is provided beneath a source of the device and has an end that extends toward the drain of the device. In some embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may extend from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region without extending to beneath the n drain implant region . In further embodiments of the present invention the p conductivity region may extend from beneath the source contact and or from beneath the n source implant region without extending to beneath the drain contact . The p conductivity region is provided in the substrate . A buffer layer is provided on the substrate and the p conductivity region . The buffer layer may be for example p type conductivity silicon carbide having a carrier concentration of about 1.5 10cmand a thickness of about 0.5 m.

A first n type conductivity channel layer is provided on the buffer layer . The first n type conductivity channel layer may have for example a carrier concentration of about 3 10cmand a thickness of about 0.28 m. The second n type conductivity channel layer may be on the first n type channel layer and may have for example a carrier concentration of about 1 10cmand a thickness of about 900 .

The n regions and are provided in the source and drain regions of the device respectively. Ohmic contacts and are provided on the implanted regions and respectively and are spaced apart so as to provide the source contact and the drain contact . Ohmic contact is provided on the p conductivity region to provide a p contact . The p conductivity region is maintained at the same potential as the source by for example electrically coupling the p ohmic contact to the source contact . An insulator layer such as an oxide is further provided on the exposed surface of the device. The second buffer layer the first n type conductivity channel layer and the second n type conductivity layer may be etched to form an isolation mesa. As illustrated the mesa includes sidewalls that define the periphery of the transistor.

As illustrated in a double recess in provided in the transistor of . The double recessed structure is provided between first and second n regions and i.e. between the source region and the drain region. The first recess has a floor that extends through the second n type conductivity channel layer to the first n type conductivity channel layer and exposes the first n type conductivity channel layer . In certain embodiments the first recess may extend into the first n type conductivity channel layer . The second recess is provided between the sidewalls of the first recess. A first sidewall of the first recess is between the source and the gate and a second sidewall of the first recess is between the drain and the gate . The floor of the second recess extends into the second n type conductivity channel layer for example a distance of about 600 .

A contact via hole is provided adjacent the source region and exposes at least a portion of the p region. The gate contact is provided in the second recess between the source region and the drain region . As further illustrated in metal overlayers and may be provided on the source and p contacts and the drain contact and the gate contact respectively. Furthermore metal overlayer may electrically couple the p contact of the p region to the source contact .

Now referring to a cross sectional view of a MESFET according to further embodiments of the present invention will be discussed. Like numbers refer to like elements in previously described figures thus descriptions of these elements will be omitted. As illustrated in the gate is disposed on the n type conductivity channel layer and is not disposed in a single or double recess.

Referring now to a plan view top view of MESFETs according to certain embodiments of the present invention will be described. As illustrated in a plurality of unit cells are provided on a substrate . A gate is situated between a source region and a drain region . As illustrated in the source contacts and drain contacts are interdigitated. An overlayer electrically couples the source region to a p region not shown via a p contact not shown that is disposed in the contact via hole .

Referring now to the conventional MESFET and the MESFET according to embodiments of the present invention may have similar characteristics at low drain voltages. However as illustrated in at high drain voltages e.g. drain voltages exceeding 70 volts the conventional MESFET experiences excessive leakage current and low transconductance . These device characteristics may degrade the power output and RF gain of such devices. In contrast as illustrated in MESFETs according to embodiments of the present invention that include the p type conductivity layer may provide a low leakage current and increased transconductance at high drain voltages.

Although the present invention is described above with respect to particular MESFETs having particular layers regions and recesses it will be understood that embodiments of the present invention are not limited to the above described MESFETs. A p type conductivity region beneath the source region of according to embodiments of the present invention may be incorporated in to other types of transistors. For example the p type conductivity region according to embodiments of the present invention may be incorporated into MESFETs described in commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 567 717 entitled to Allen et al. the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in its entirety.

As is briefly described above transistors according to embodiments of the present invention provide a p type conductivity region beneath the source region of the transistor having an end that extends towards the drain region of the transistor. The presence of this p type conductivity region may provide for example devices having improved breakdown voltages without compromising other performance characteristics of the device because the p type conductivity region may inhibit electron injection from the source. This may provide an advantage over conventional field effect transistors that may sacrifice device performance characteristics to obtain a high breakdown voltage.

Although the present invention is described above with reference to SiC MESFETs the present invention is not limited to SiC MESFETs. For example MESFETs according to embodiments of the present invention may be for example gallium arsenide GaAs MESFETs or Gallium Nitride GaN MESFETs. In particular if the present invention were described with respect to GaAs MESFETs the p type conductivity regions might be p type conductivity GaAs regions the n type conductivity channel layers might be n type conductivity GaAs layers and the like.

In the drawings and specification there have been disclosed typical preferred embodiments of the invention and although specific terms are employed they are used in a generic and descriptive sense only and not for purposes of limitation the scope of the invention being set forth in the following claims.

