---

title: Normalized matched filter—a low rank approach
abstract: This invention addresses the problem of radar target detection in severely heterogeneous clutter environments. Specifically, we present the performance of the normalized matched filter test in a background of disturbance consisting of clutter having a covariance matrix with known structure and unknown scaling plus background white Gaussian noise. It is shown that when the clutter covariance matrix is low rank, the (LRNMF) test retains invariance with respect to the unknown scaling as well as the background noise level and has an approximately constant false alarm rate (CFAR). Therefore, a technique known as self-censoring reiterative fast maximum likelihood/adaptive power residue (SCRFML/APR) is developed to treat this problem and its performance is discussed. The SCRFML/AP method is used to estimate the unknown covariance matrix in the presence of outliers. This covariance matrix estimate can then be used in the LRNAMF or any other eigen-based adaptive processing technique.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=H0002222&OS=H0002222&RS=H0002222
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: H0002222
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051013
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalty thereon.

The invention relates generally to radar receivers and more specifically it relates to a low rank approximation to interference covariance for target detection in non Gaussian clutter.

This invention addresses the problem of signal detection in interference composed of clutter and possibly jamming having a covariance matrix with known structure but unknown level and background white noise. The technique developed in this paper ensures invariance with respect to the unknown level and the background noise power. The research is motivated by the problem of space time adaptive processing STAP for airborne phased array radar applications. Typically a radar receiver front end consists of an array of J antenna elements processing N pulses in a coherent processing interval. We are interested in the problem of target detection given the JN 1 spatio temporal data vector.

Patented art of interest includes the following U.S. Patents the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference 

U.S. Pat. No. 6 771 723 entitled Normalized parametric adaptive matched filter receiver issued to Davis

The Davis patent describes an apparatus and method for improving the detection of signals obscured by either correlated Gaussian or non Gaussian noise plus additive white noise. Estimates from multichannel data of model parameters that described the noise disturbance correlation are obtained from data that contain signal free data vectors referred to as secondary or reference cell data. These parameters form the coefficients of a multichannel whitening filter. A data vector to be tested for the presence of a signal passes through the multichannel whitening filter. The filter output is then processed to form a test statistic.

Cangiani et al. disclose a three dimensional electro optical tracker with a Kalman filter in which the target is modeled in space as the superposition of two Guassian ellipsoids projected onto an image plane. Puzzo offers a similar disclosure. Champion discloses a digital communication system.

Michels et al. U.S. Pat. No. 6 226 321 hereby incorporated by reference discloses implementations for a signal that has unknown amplitude. For the signal of unknown amplitude Michels et al. teaches us how to incorporate the estimated signal amplitude directly into the parametric detection procedure. Furthermore Michels teaches two separate methods namely 1 how to detect the signal in the presence of partially correlated non Gaussian clutter disturbance and 2 how to detect the signal in the presence of partially correlated Gaussian clutter disturbance. Furthermore the method to detect the signal in the presence of partially correlated non Gaussian clutter involves processing the received radar data and requires the use of functional forms that depend upon the probability density function pdf of the disturbance. Thus the latter method requires knowledge of the pdf statistics of the non Gaussian disturbance. The method does not teach how to process the data in such a manner that would not require knowledge of the disturbance processes. Furthermore it does not teach how to process the data with one method that would detect the signal in either Gaussian or non Gaussian disturbance. Thus there exists a need for apparatus and method of processing the data with a detection method that does not require knowledge of the clutter statistics. Furthermore there exists a need for a method that detects the signal in either Gaussian or non Gaussian disturbance.

The performance improvements of the presently disclosed invention relative to prior art are detailed in J. H. Michels M. Rangaswamy and B. Himed Evaluation of the Normalized Parametric Adaptive Matched Filter STAP Test in Airborne Radar Clutter IEEE Internationals Radar 2000 Conference May 7 11 2000 Washington D.C. and J. H. Michels M. Rangaswamy and B. Himed Performance of STAP Tests in Compound Gaussian Clutter First IEEE Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal.

Previous efforts derived the normalized matched filter NMF test for the problem of detecting a rank one signal in additive clutter modeled as a spherically invariant random process. The NMF test is given by where x is the observed data vector e is the known spatio temporal signal steering vector and Rc is the known clutter covariance matrix. A statistic similar in spirit was also considered in for vector subspace detection in compound Gaussian clutter.

We developed a technique known as the low rank normalized matched filter LRNMF for radar target detection in disturbance composed of clutter and background white noise having unknown but differing power levels. We show that the LRNMF test exhibits invariance with respect to the unknown clutter and noise power levels when the clutter covariance matrix is low rank. Performance of the test is shown to be a function of the number of antenna array elements number of pulses processed in a coherent processing interval CPI and the rank of the clutter covariance matrix which can be determined from system parameters such as platform speed inter element spacing and pulse repetition interval PRI . Consequently the technique offers a constant false alarm rate CFAR for the case where the clutter and noise covariance matrices have known structure and unknown scaling. An adaptive version of the test known as the low rank normalized adaptive matched filter LRNAMF is developed to address the problem of target detection when both the covariance structure and level for the clutter and noise are unknown. The LRNAMF performance is benchmarked in terms of the sample support needed for attaining detection performance to within 3 dB of the LRNMF. Issues of CFAR and clutter rank determination are also addressed. Performance analysis is carried out using data from the knowledge aided sensor signal processing and expert reasoning KASSPER Program.

The present invention includes a technique known as the low rank normalized matched filter LRNMF for radar target detection in disturbance composed of clutter and background white noise having unknown but differing power levels.

This invention seeks to extend previous work by including the effect of additive white Gaussian noise. Specifically we consider the binary hypothesis testing problem given by H x d c n H x ae d ae c n where x is the observed data vector c denotes the Gaussian clutter vector having a covariance matrix sRc with known structure and unknown level s n denotes the additive white Gaussian noise vector having covariance matrix I where I is the JN JN identity matrix and is the unknown noise power e denotes the steering vector and a is the unknown complex amplitude of the target. For the sake of compactness d is used to denote disturbance consisting of clutter plus white noise. Consequently the disturbance covariance matrix is given by Rd sRc I.

In order to understand the advantages of the present invention the reader s attention is now directed towards which is a block diagram of the prior art electro optical tracker of the above cited Cangiani et al patent that uses a Kalman filter on the data measurement Z n of the sensors and . In the preprocessor averages and orders the image data for the Kalman filter . However there are situations where the image data is unaltered by the preprocessor . For example where the entire image can be encompassed in the 8 8 window no averaging occurs. The image data is not modified and the preprocessor is in reality a pass through. Therefore the Kalman filter in essence receives input directly from the electro optical sensor and the range sensor .

The output of the 56 Kalman filter is taken from the output of the second adder . The signal at that point is designated x n n . The carat indicates that this quantity is an estimate and the n n indicates that the estimate is at time nT given n measurements where T is the time interval between interactions. The target dynamics estimate for time n 1 T which is designated x n 1 n . The measurement model processes the predicted state vector estimate from the result of previous iteration x n n 1 which was stored in the buffer 50 generating h x n n 1 the estimate of the current measurement. This is subtracted from the measurement vector z n in the first adder yielding the residual or innovations process z n h x n n 1 . The residual is then multiplied by the Kalman gain matrix K n and the result is used to update the state vector estimate x n . In each iteration the state vector x is updated to an approximation of the actual position velocity and acceleration of the target.

The prior art invariable properties fail for the problem where the clutter power and noise variance are unknown and different from each other. This is due to the fact that invariance condition of requires a common unknown scaling on the clutter and background white noise a condition that is seldom satisfied in practice. A uniformly most powerful invariant UMPI test for this problem becomes mathematically intractable in general. However in many practical airborne radar applications Rc has rank r which is much less than the spatio temporal product M JN. For example the clutter rank in the airborne linear phased array radar problem under ideal conditions no mutual coupling between array elements is given by the Brennan rule r J N 1 where 2 T d is the slope of the clutter ridge with denoting the platform velocity T denoting the pulse repetition interval and d denoting the inter element spacing. A nominal value of 1 yields a clutter rank r J N 1 

Additionally the low rank approximation enables reduction of training data support compared to full dimension STAP processing. An adaptive version of the test is also developed and its performance is studied. Target contamination of training data has a deleterious impact on the performance of the test. Therefore a technique known as self censoring reiterative fast maximum likelihood adaptive power residue SCRFML APR is developed to treat this problem and its performance is discussed. The SCRFML APR method is used to estimate the unknown covariance matrix in the presence of outliers. This covariance matrix estimate can then be used in the low rank normalized adaptive matched filter LRNAMF or any other eigen based adaptive processing technique. Now we introduce the low rank normalized matched filter LRNM . Tiie performance of the LRNMF in terms of analytical calculation of false alarm probability P and detection probability P discussed below introduces an adaptive version of the LRNMF known as the LRNAMF and discusses its performance with respect to CFAR sample support for subspace estimation and detection.

The disturbance covariance matrix can be expressed as R UDU where U is the matrix whose columns are the normalized eigenvectors of Rand D is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues of R. When Rhas rank r it follows from 20 that the inverse covariance matrix can be approximated as where P Euuis a rank r projection matrix formed from the eigenvectors corresponding to the dominant eigenvalues of Rd. For Rc with known structure the dominant modes are readily determined and are unaffected by s.

We now use the form of Rgiven by 5 to express the LRNMF test as Observe that the LRNMF test is invariant to s and . Furthermore let e I P e and x I P x. Thus the LRNMF test can be expressed as which allows for important interpretations of the test statistic as normalized matched filtering in the sub dominant disturbance subspace or a dominant mode rejector followed by quadratic normalizations to ensure CFAR. It is helpful to note in this context that the low rank approximation to the clairvoyant RMB beamformer given by and the low rank approximation to the matched filter for rank one signal detection in Gaussian noise given by incur an explicit dependence on . Consequently they do not offer CFAR with respect to . The work of considered a test involving the numerator of the test statistic of 8 and its adaptive version. However such a test incurs explicit dependence on . Therefore it lacks CFAR. Consequently performance analysis was presented in terms of the output signal to noise ratio SNR with elegant derivations for the output SNR probability density function PDF . In this paper we concern ourselves with the performance of the test of equation 6 and its adaptive version. We now consider the performance of the test of equation 6 . Analytical expressions are derived for the probability of false alarm and probability of detection for the LRNMF. For convenience we work with the test of the form of 7 to carry out the analysis. Noting that a unit vector in the direction of eis given by e e ee xxcan be expressed as the sum of the squared magnitudes of projections along space of edenoted by . Let w i 1 2 . . . M r 1 denote an orthonormal basis set for and X ex X wx i 1 2 . . . M r 1. Then X i 0 1 . . . M r 1 are statistically independent complex Gaussian random variables. Let The test statistic of 7 admits a representation of the form Under H X i 1 . . . M r 1 are complex Gaussian random variables distributed as CN 0 . Consequently is a Chi squared distributed random variable with M r 1 complex degrees of freedom. Also under H Xis a complex Gaussian random variable distributed as CN 0 . Hence is a chi squared distributed random variable with one complex degree of freedom. It follows from 1 that is a central F distributed random variable whose probability density function PDF is given by where Using a straightforward transformation of random variables we show that the PDF of Aunder Hfollows a beta distribution given by f y M r 1 1 y . The probability of false alarm is given by P P H 1 .

Observe that the false alarm probability is independent of the nuisance parameters s and . Instead it depends only on M and r which are functions of system parameters such as the number of array elements number of pulses in a CPI and the slope of the clutter ridge. Thus a low rank approximation of Rresults in CFAR for the LRNMF test.

We then proceed to calculate the probability of detection for the test of 6 . Under H the PDF of remains unchanged. However under H Xis a complex Gaussian random variable distributed as CN a ee . Consequently is a non central chi squared distributed random variable with one complex degrees of freedom having non centrality parameter A a ee . Noting that a eeis the signal energy in the sub dominant disturbance is simply subspace it follows that A a ee is simply the SNR arising in the sub dominant disturbance subspace. Thus the non centrality parameter is related to the SNR in a straightforward manner. Hence has a non central F distribution in this instance. Again using a straightforward transformation of random variables it follows that A follows a non central beta PDF given by The probability of detection is given by It is important to note that Pdepends on only through A SNR and not on nuisance parameters such as exact signal shape signal complex amplitude or exact noise variance. shows a plot of the false alarm probability versus threshold for the LRNMF test with the clutter rank r as a parameter. We observe a significant increase in the threshold with increasing clutter rank for a given Pfa value. A plot of Pd versus SNR for the LRNMF test with r as a parameter is shown in FIG. . Relevant test parameters are reported in the plot. We note that a 1 32 dB loss in detection performance is encountered as the rank varies from r 4 to 55. presents a comparison of the performance for the LRNMF with r 4 and 55 with the full rank NMF for the case where the disturbance consists of white noise alone with a full rank covariance matrix and no clutter. Relevant test parameters are reported in the plot. For completeness we reproduce below the analytical expressions for the false alarm and detection probabilities of the full rank NMF. Specifically where Ais the full rank NMF output SNR. The curves in reveal important features of the low rank approximation to the covariance matrix. Curve corresponding to r 0 no clutter upper bounds the performance of the low rank approximation. Furthermore for the clutter rank r 4 of the LRNMF test attains performance close to its upper bound i.e. the full rank M M covariance matrix NMF test performance in background white noise with unknown power level. This is due to the fact that the for P 10 0 1969 while 0 2088 a slight threshold increase . Furthermore for r 4 A A negligible SNR loss . For instance if e 1 M 1 1 . . . 1 and P is a rank four projection matrix A 0 9375A. Hence the LRNMF for r 4 attains performance close to the upper bound indistinguishable from the upper bound performance in FIG. .

As the clutter rank increases performance of the LRNMF degrades. The performance degradation approximately 4 dB loss with increasing rank from r 4 to 55 can be accounted for due to the fact that the threshold incurs an increase with increasing clutter rank. Furthermore A which is a measure of the output SNR is also decreased with increasing clutter rank. Since Pis a monotonic function of A performance is degraded with increasing r.

This is expected since the full rank NMF test for r 0 is invariant to the unknown white noise level. However addition of clutter results in the loss of gain invariance in general. Nevertheless imposing a low rank structure approximation of the clutter covariance matrix restores the gain invariance for small values of clutter rank. When the clutter rank follows the Brennan s rule r 33 we note that there is a slight detection loss of the LRNMF compared to the full rank NMF test with r 0. However the LRNMF test still retains the advantage of not requiring knowledge of s and .

In this discussion we present the performance analysis of an adaptive version of the LRNMF test of 6 . The disturbance covariance matrix is seldom known in practice and thus must be estimated using representative training data. Specifically we consider the LRNMF test of 6 with P replaced by its estimate P formed from a singular value decomposition SVD of a data matrix Z whose columns z i 1 2 . . . K contain representative training data. The resulting test is called the LRNAMF. It can be readily demonstrated using arguments similar to those employed for the LRNMF test that the LRNAMF offers invariance to the unknown clutter power as well as the background noise power for large clutter to noise ratio CNR i.e. s . In radar applications this condition is satisfied in most instances. For example the MCARM and KASSPER data sets offer an average CNR of 40 dB.

Typically r is unknown in practice. Consequently a key issue in this context is the determination of r from the training data. Several techniques for determining r are available in the literature. The method of is best suited for our analysis since it does not require explicit knowledge of . Furthermore the method has been successfully applied to radar data from the multichannel airborne radar measurement MCARM and research laboratory space time adaptive processing RLSTAP programs.

Data from the L band data set of the KASSPER program is used for carrying out performance analysis of the LRNAMF. The L band data set consists of a datacube of 1000 range bins corresponding to the returns from a single coherent processing interval CPI from 11 channels and 32 pulses resulting in a spatio temporal product of 352. Relevant system parameters for the L band data sets from the KASSPER and RLSTAP programs are provided in Tables 1 and 2 respectively. Since analytical expressions for Pand Pfor the LRNAMF are mathematically intractable we resort to performance evaluation using Monte Carlo simulation.

In we present an example where the rank of the clutter subspace is incorrectly estimated. Specifically we consider the case where r has been underestimated and show a plot of Pversus SINR. The predicted r from the Brennan rule is 42 whereas the estimated rank is 33. The error in estimating r is caused due to the use of an ad hoc procedure for determining r instead of the method of prior art. The specific method used in determining r is based on calculating the ratio of the sum of the squared magnitude of the dominant singular values and the sum of the squared magnitude of all the singular values arising significantly outperform the SCRFML GIP and FML methods i.e. the two targets are clearly observable from the output residue about 22 dB above the APR associated with the target free range cells . The latter two methods show poor but similar performance in all cases. The SCRFML APR method is most useful in instances where detection and training have to be performed on a common data set. While no optimality property of the approach is claimed the ad hoc SCRFML APR method offers a powerful tool for removing outliers in training data.

This invention presents an analysis of the NMF test for the case of clutter plus white noise. Imposing a low rank structure on the known clutter covariance matrix enables approximate CFAR behavior yielding robustness with respect to unknown clutter scaling and unknown background noise level. Analytical expressions for the detection and false alarm probabilities are presented and illustrated with numerical examples in the form of plots Pversus SNR. We observe a degradation in performance as the clutter rank increases. This loss approximately 4 dB is quite significant at low false alarm rates.

Performance of the LRNAMF an adaptive version of the LRNMF is studied using the KASSPER radar data. We observe a 4 dB degradation in performance due to the finite sample support used in estimating the clutter subspace. Furthermore we note a loss of CFAR for the LRNAMF due to the threshold dependence on the Doppler beam position. An important feature of the LRNAMF is the ability to reduce the training support for subspace estimation. Finally we note that accurate determination of the rank of the clutter subspace significantly impacts detection performance. Critical to the performance of the LRNAMF is the ability to obtain representative training data. However in dense target environments significant performance penalty is incurred due to target contamination of the training data. This results in signal cancellation causing a degradation in the SNR. Consequently the SCRFML APR method presented here is useful for rejecting outliers in the training data and obtaining good estimates of the projection matrix. Further performance analysis using this technique with the LRNAMF will be investigated in the future. An important issue in this context is the development of a suitable stopping criterion for the SCRFML APR method.

Additionally finite sample support used in clutter subspace estimation causes subspace perturbation and subspace swapping. The impact of these effects on LRNAMF performance is currently under investigation. These issues will be reported on in the future.

While the invention has been described in its presently preferred embodiment it is understood that the words which have been used are words of description rather than words of limitation and that changes within the purview of the appended claims may be made without departing from the scope and spirit of the invention in its broader aspects.

