---

title: Nanotube-based sensors and probes
abstract: Described herein are novel devices for the study of transport characteristics of complex or simple fluids, interactions among molecules in suspension, interactions between molecules in suspension and wall-bound molecules, and biochemical sensing devices made of reservoirs for fluid containment linked by a nanotubes. Also disclosed are methods of delivering medicaments and monitoring fluidic interactions of molecules or analytes.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07964159&OS=07964159&RS=07964159
owner: Drexel University
number: 07964159
owner_city: Philadelphia
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050708
---
This invention was made with government support under grant number CTS 0210579 awarded by the National Science Foundation NSF . The government has certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to nanotube based sensors and probes used for biochemical and chemical sensing and processing and for electron and optical microscopy of chemical and biological interactions in liquids and gases. Also disclosed are methods of medicament transportation and monitoring molecular interactions.

One of the obstacles encountered when studying nano scale phenomena is the limited resolution of visible light. When dealing with solid or frozen materials one can take advantage of the relatively small wavelengths of electrons to visualize phenomena at sub nanometer length scales. Unfortunately however conventional electron microscopy requires vacuum conditions and in the past this has precluded its use for the study of volatile fluids. With present day technology at best one can operate with environmental chambers that allow the introduction of humid gases. The conditions prevailing in the environmental chamber are very different from the ones experienced for example by biological molecules in aqueous solutions and catalytic reactions in general. This limits one s ability to carry out studies of biological interactions and chemical reactions under controlled conditions.

It is envisioned that experiments currently conducted with near field microscopy and total internal reflection TIRF microscopy can be duplicated with electron microscopy with much higher resolution than is currently feasible. The molecules to be observed can be tagged with particles atoms and possibly observed directly without a label. As a result various reactions and interactions in liquid and gaseous environments may be studied.

A common method for the detection of particles and biological substances is to transmit the analyte through a small tube or pore and monitor the effect of the presence of the analyte on the ionic current. The presence of an analyte suppresses or blocks the ionic current. The magnitude of the blockage and its duration can be used to characterize the size of the analyte. To make the detection process specific one can use functionalized carriers such as particles or known molecules that bind the analyte specifically and monitor the effect of the analyte on the characteristics of the carrier. The sensitivity of this biosensing technique depends on the size of the pore or tube. The small diameter of the nanotubes would facilitate the construction of high sensitivity devices.

Currently pulled glass micropipettes are used to study the properties of cells and to exchange material with a cell s interior. These techniques are intrusive and typically limited to operating with a single cell at a time. There is a need for less intrusive probes.

Currently scanning probes allow one to probe the mechanical and electrical properties of samples. There is an unmet need for probes that can exchange fluids and molecules with the scanned sample.

The present invention provides analytical devices comprising a substrate a barrier structure defining two reservoirs for fluid containment and at least one nanotube between the reservoirs the lumen of which nanotube is at least partially observable by electron optical or ion beam microscopy and the openings of which nanotube are in fluid communication with said reservoirs.

The techniques described herein facilitate the fabrication of devices comprising a plurality of nanotubes similarly or differently sized. The nanotubes may also be similarly or differently functionalized to interact with the same or different reservoirs. Groups of nanotubes may communicate with shared reservoirs or with individual reservoirs.

The present invention also includes methods of monitoring the fluidic interactions of molecules. The method comprises placing the molecules in a fluid placing the fluid into a device of the present invention causing the fluid to flow from one reservoir to another reservoir through the nanotube and observing the fluidic interaction of the molecules within the nanotube.

Also disclosed are cellular or scanning probes comprising a substrate a barrier structure on the substrate defining a reservoir for fluid containment and a nanotube. The nanotube has an opening proximal to and in fluid communication with the reservoir and the distal opening of the nanotube is exposed. There are also embodiments in which the distal opening is used for insertion into a biological membrane. Such embodiments may facilitate the introduction into or withdrawal from a cell or molecule in fluids.

There are also methods of delivery for a medicament comprising placing a medicament in a fluid then placing that fluid into at least one probe or device of the present invention and then delivering the medicament contained within the fluid into a biological membrane through the nanotube.

Arrays comprising more than one cellular or scanning probe are disclosed. The arrays comprise a substrate and barrier structures on said substrate defining reservoirs for fluid containment. They also comprise nanotubes having openings proximal to and in fluid communication with the reservoirs and openings distal to the reservoirs for insertion into a biological membrane. More than one probe may be located on the same substrate.

The fabrication techniques described herein facilitate the fabrication of devices that allow a plurality of probes of different sizes and functionalization to interact with a single or group of cells. Groups of probes may communicate with shared reservoirs or with individual reservoirs.

Disclosed herein are hybrid methods for the fabrication of nanotube based fluidic devices devices for biochemical sensing and processing and devices that facilitate electron microscopy of biological and chemical interactions in liquids or pressurized gases. The embodiments of the present invention allow for the transport of simple and complex fluids from one reservoir to the other or to a biological membrane through a nanotube. The transportation may be facilitated by means of an electric field across the electrodes such as by electroosmosis or electrophoresis by electro wetting and electro migration and by diffusion. The fluids may also be made to flow by surface tension or pressure. Molecules may be transmitted by the directed motion of cargo carrying processive molecular motors. The activity inside the nanotube may be observed through a pathway in the substrate and between the reservoirs to the lumen of the nanotube. The contents of the nanotube may be observed for example with optical fluorescent and electron microscopes or ion beam microscopes. Alternatively they can be measured with electrical means such as the monitoring of the ionic current through the liquid confined inside the nanotube and the monitoring of the effect of the contents on the nanotube wall s electrical optical and mechanical properties.

One embodiment that may be preferred provides devices comprising a substrate a barrier structure defining two reservoirs for fluid containment and a nanotube between the reservoirs. The openings of the nanotube are in fluid communication with the reservoirs. The term reservoirs as used herein is considered a chamber and its interior used for storing fluid or a conduit that facilitates the supply of fluids. The nanotube connects the two reservoirs and facilitates the transport of fluids from one reservoir to the other. Such an embodiment may be utilized as a biosensor for the detection and characterization of molecules as a device to study the transport characteristics of simple and complex confined liquids. Some embodiments may be used as a miniature containment vessel allowing for electron microscopy of reactions and interactions in liquids and pressurized gases within the vacuum environment of the electron microscope.

For some embodiments additional steps may be incorporated to cap the reservoirs with a cover layer structure as seen in . A cover structure formed of a glass slide with pre drilled access holes and coated with a thin layer of an adhesive film like SU8 may be placed on the finished sensor device. The cover may also be formed with a polymer or elastomer layer.

In other embodiments the biochemical sensor may further comprise a pathway through said polymer and between said reservoirs to the lumen of said nanotube . This pathway allows for the contents of the nanotube to be observed using microscopy known in the art. depicts the cross section of one embodiment of the present invention. The biochemical sensor comprises a nanotube two reservoirs and an air pathway . The reservoirs are separated by the air pathway and bridged by the nanotube . The reservoirs may be filled with a fluid or with fluid comprising particles or macromolecules . The air pathway provides a route for a beam of electrons to reach the nanotube . Electron microscope observations can be carried out either in transmission or reflection modes. An optical or fluorescent source may also be used to visualize the fluid and particle motions inside the nanotube using either transmission or reflection modes. The current voltage technique shown in may also be used to characterize the fluid motion inside the nanotube and to detect the presence and size of particles and molecules. In this case voltage is applied between the electrodes and the ionic current I of the fluid medium in the nanotube is measured as a function of time. The amplitude of the ionic current s suppression or blockage is proportional to the size of the particle or molecule translocating through the nanotube . A depiction of the anticipated current measurement as a function of time t is depicted in the Figure inset.

The embodiment depicted in may be constructed according to process steps depicted in . The device fabrication starts with a substrate . The pathway in the substrate is formed with wet chemical etching. One can employ KOH etching ion beam etching using a focused ion beam or a combination of the two. Two electrodes are formed on the substrate using standard microfabrication processes. A nanotube is between the electrodes and across the pathway by using a dielectrophoresis assembly method. Next the nanotube ends are capped with a micropatterned sacrificial layer such as that formed by a positive photoresist using standard microfabrication processes. The device is spun on with a thick photoresist and then patterned to open access to the reservoirs using standard microfabrication processes. A weak oxygen plasma or HF acid treatment of the device between steps and may be applied to improve the adhesion of the thick SU8 to the substrate or to the nanotube surface. The sacrificial layers are removed using a solvent like SU8 developer or acetone to expose the nanotube ends to air.

Additional steps may be incorporated to add a cover structure . Two approaches are described. A cover structure formed of a glass slide with pre opened windows and spun on one side of the structure with a thin layer of adhesive film may be used to make the embodiment as shown in step . The cover structure structure may also be introduced at step prior to opening of the reservoirs using standard microfabrication processes. Inlet and outlet ports may be sealed off with properly engineered closures to make the devices vacuum tight.

In addition to the applications listed above there are embodiments used as scanning or cellular probes to penetrate biological membranes to exchange material deliver material or extract material with minimal intrusion and high resolution and serve as a nanoelectrode. depicts the cross section and the front view of such an embodiment. Such embodiments of the present invention comprise a substrate a barrier structure defining one reservoir for fluid containment and a nanotube having an opening proximal to and in fluid communication with the reservoir and an opening distal to the reservoir being exposed. The scanning probes of the present invention comprise a substrate a barrier structure on the substrate defining one reservoir for fluid containment and a nanotube having an opening proximal to and in fluid communication with the reservoir and an opening distal to the reservoir for insertion into a biological membrane.

The exposed opening of the nanotube that is distal to the reservoir is for insertion into a biological membrane. Once inserted a sample may be retrieved from the membrane so that it may be observed or analyzed within the nanotube or reservoir . In other embodiments once the distal opening of the nanotube is inserted the contents of the reservoir may be injected into the membrane. The scanning probes may be functionalized to facilitate selective binding and transport. There are embodiments that may also serve as nanoelectrodes.

Multiple probes may make an array. The probes may communicate in parallel with multiple cells for massive parallel processing. Such an embodiment may be seen in and B. Such arrays comprise more than one probe comprising a substrate and a barrier structures on said substrate comprising reservoirs for fluid containment. The nanotubes have openings proximal to and in fluid communication with the reservoirs and openings distal to the reservoirs for insertion into a biological membrane. More than one probe in such embodiments is located on the same substrate. More than one nanotube may have an opening proximal to the reservoir. The fluids held in such reservoirs may differ. Embodiments may be used for drug screening and genetic and tissue engineering. Furthermore there are biochemical sensing devices comprising a scanning probe as described herein.

The cellular probes of the present invention may be smaller or have a higher aspect ratio i.e. the ratio of the tip s length to its width than probes currently used. There may be a plurality of probes with individual nanotubes or groups of nanotubes communicating with individual cells. Some embodiments may comprise nanotubes connected to microfluidic conduits for continuous supply of reagents.

Some embodiments of the probes of the present invention may be constructed according to process steps illustrated in . The embodiment may be made starting with a substrate . Two electrodes such as Au electrodes with a NiCr wetting layer are formed on the substrate using standard microfabrication techniques. A nanotube is placed in position between the electrodes using a dielectrophoresis assembly method. Next one of the nanotube ends is capped with a micro patterned sacrificial layer formed from positive photoresist S using standard microfabrication processes. Thick permanent photoresist is then spun on both sides of the wafer patterned and developed. A weak oxygen plasma or HF acid treatment of the device between steps and may be applied to improve the adhesion of the thick SU8 to the substrate s or to the nanotube surface. The sacrificial layers are removed using a solvent such as a SU8 developer or acetone to form the reservoir . Finally part of the substrate is etched away leaving a chamber with a protruding nanotube .

Alternatively devices may be fabricated with the two photon lithography as shown in . This process uses the step of two photon lithography instead of conventional optical lithography to expose or cross link the selected regions on the organic polymer . The unexposed portions of the polymer are subsequently developed as shown in steps g and h to form the desired patterns such as reservoirs barriers and access windows as shown in the

An embodiment similar to the one depicted in can be formed as a scanning microscope tip with the added functionality of facilitating the transmission of liquids and molecules to the sample that is being probed.

It will be appreciated that the devices and probes of the present invention lend themselves to certain novel methods. To that end there are methods of delivering a medicament comprise placing a medicament in a fluid placing the fluid into at least one probe as described herein and delivering the medicament contained within the fluid into a biological membrane through the nanotube. The biological membrane may be a cell membrane. The medicament to be delivered may comprise protein hormones antibiotics enzymes or chemical agents. In some embodiments there is more than one probe being utilized. In such embodiments the medicament contained within the fluid may be injected into a membrane through more than one probe. Also the probes in such embodiments may act in parallel during injection.

There are also methods of monitoring the fluidic interactions of an analyte or molecule or between molecules in suspension and molecules immobilized to the nanotube s wall comprise placing the analytes or molecules in a fluid placing the fluid into a device as described in the present disclosure and observing the fluidic interactions of said analyte within the nanotube. There are also embodiments for monitoring the interactions of an analyte wherein the fluid is placed into an array comprising more than one probe and more than one probe is located on the same substrate. The diameters of the nanotubes in such embodiments may be the same or different. The functionalization of each nanotube may also be the same or different in the probes in array embodiments. In some embodiments the methods include a step where the fluid is caused to flow from one reservoir to another reservoir or through a membrane. The flow may be caused by electroosmosis or electrophoresis.

Ionic current measurements through embodiments of the present invention have been carried out and the present invention has utility as a highly sensitive Coulter counter. The experimental observations of the ion transmission and the particle translocation provide evidence that the hybrid fabrication methods of some embodiments provide a well functioning nanotube based fluidic device that can be used as a high sensitivity particle counter. Furthermore the disclosed devices and methods should allow one to position multiple nanotubes with different diameters on the same substrate facilitating massive parallel processing and extending the technique to nanotubes of molecular dimensions should also be feasible.

The observing steps may be performed via electron microscopy. Observation may also be done using optical or fluorescent microscopy. For optical microscopy the nanotube confines a minute quantity of labeled analytes that can be observed with minimal interference. The fluidic interactions that may be observed comprise the effects of the analyte or molecule on an ionic current the size and velocity of the analyte or molecule. Also the resonance frequency the electrical resistance or impedence of the nanotube may be observed. The analyte or molecule may also comprise a drug to be screened or tested. A vacuum may also be applied to the device in some method embodiments.

The nanotubes used in the embodiments of the present invention may be amorphous multi walled or single walled. The physical properties of the nanotube may be modified by chemical or thermal treatment. The walls of the nanotubes may be unmodified or functionalized with ligands or immobilized ligands. The nanotubes may also be electrically charged. A plurality of nanotubes with similar or different diameters and functionalization may be integrated into some embodiments. Groups of nanotubes may communicate with a single reservoir or each nanotube may communicate with an individual reservoir.

Analytes or molecules transmitted within the nanotube may also affect a nanotube s properties. As a result the mechanical optical or electrical properties of the nanotube may be observed in some methods of the present invention. These properties include mass stiffness elastic properties and electric properties. A nanotube s inner wall may also be functionalized to selectively bind or adsorb specific target analytes or molecules. Since the nanotube wall thickness is small the presence of target analytes within the nanotube and the binding of analytes to the nanotube walls can be sensed by monitoring the wall s mechanical properties such as the natural frequency of the nanotube vibrations or the electrical properties such a electrical resistance and impedance. Adsorbed analytes or molecules may also affect the nanotube wall s optical properties and the electroosmotic velocity of fluids inside the nanotube. The interactions between molecule in suspension and those attached to the nanotube wall may also be observed.

Methods of making some embodiments of the disclosed devices are depicted in . The device fabrication starts with a Si substrate . Two electrodes formed of an evaporated 100 nm thick Au with a 10 nm thick NiCr adhesion layer are patterned on the substrate using standard photolithographic techniques including the process of wet etching of Au and NiCr layers . The electrodes patterned substrate is treated with oxygen plasma 300W 3 min Technics PE11 A to remove organic contaminants. A carbon nanotube is between the electrodes with a dielectrophoresis assembly method. The dielectrophoresis assembly process consists of positioning a drop laden with a dilute solution 2 isoprophyl alcohol of template grown carbon nanotubes on top of the electrodes and applying AC 10V 1 MHz electric field across the electrodes. The nanotubes were polarized and migrate to bridge the gap across the electrodes. Once a nanotube was placed at a desired location the nanotube s ends are capped by patterning of sacrificial layer formed with a positive photoresist Shipley Microposit S1813 using standard photolithographic techniques. Then photolithographic processes utilizing SU 8 photoresist MichoChem SU 8 2050 are used to construct the necessary plumbing to facilitate liquid flow into and out of the nanotube. The SU 8 is spun at 3000 rpm and patterned to open the reservoirs and to form the barrier structure nominally 50 m in height . A hydrofluoric acid treatment is applied between steps d and e to promote the adhesion of SU 8 to the substrate. Sacrificial layers are removed using a solvent such as a SU 8 developer and acetone to expose the nanotube s ends . The hybrid method renders the barrier structure that separates the two reservoirs and prevents fluid leakage between them while holding the nanotube in position.

To demonstrate that the nanotube device can be used to transport ions in aqueous solutions the nanotubes were filled with a 0.1 M KCl electrolyte solution and measured the current voltage characteristics. Shown in the inset is a schematic of the experimental set up. Tungsten electrodes were submerged in the electrolyte solution inside the glass capillaries that were mounted to either side of the reservoirs. One electrode was held at a ground potential while potential difference was applied through another electrode. An HP 4145B parameter analyzer provided a linear voltage sweep at the rate of 5 mV s and recorded the corresponding current. shows ionic current I as a function of the potential difference V across the driving electrodes. The ionic current across the nanotube below 1V varies linearly as a function of the potential difference applied across the nanotube. The ionic current through a single carbon nanotube filled with a KCL solution increases linearly with the potential difference up to the applied voltages of 1V and 0.5V respectively. Assuming that the current below 1V is carried solely by the ions in the electrolyte solution ionic current across the nanotube below 1V can be described by I dV 41 where is the bulk electrolyte conductivity d is the nanotube diameter and l is the nanotube length. This equation can be used to evaluate the geometric parameters of the nanotube. The calculated nanotube diameter is 600 nm with 1.29 10 cmfor the 0.1 M KCl solution and the measured nanotube length of 32 m. This diameter is in qualitative agreement with the nanotube diameter of about 500 nm measured from the optical image of the nanotube device.

The I V curve of the nanotube device exhibits a noticeable change in the ionic conductivity at 1 V with linear increase in the current response when the potential difference between the two electrodes is larger than 1 V.

Experimental data demonstrates both the transport of fluid inside a carbon nanotube and the feasibility of observing the liquid motion. The motion of the fluid in and nanoparticles in inside the nanotube was detected respectively by optical microscopy and fluorescence microscopy. shows a sequence of transport of liquid ethylene glycol in a nanotube with a length of 22 m and a diameter of about 500 nm. The entire nanotube is filled up by liquid condensation within 3.4 s. The location of the liquid vapor interface is indicated with a vertical arrow in . The empty part of the nanotube appears as a set of two closely spaced parallel lines formed by the nanotube s wall with a light colored medium between them. The liquid filled part of the nanotube appears dark. The liquid air interface started to recede from the right end side of the nanotube while the other liquid air interface remained pinned to the left end side . The evaporation process lasted about 4.7 s. The fluorescence microscope images in to show the nanotube at 10 s 20 s and at 40 s after the nanotube was brought into contact with a liquid drop laden with fluorescent particles. shows an optical image of a nanotube 29 m in length 500 nm in diameter and 15 nm in wall thickness. The portion of the nanotube packed with the 50 nm diameter fluorescence beads appears as a segment of a bright line on the fluorescence microscope. The rest of the nanotube appears dark. As the particles accumulate the bright line grows to include the entire nanotube length of 29 um in 40 seconds. The location of the stacked particles liquid interface is indicated with vertical arrows in . The schematic depiction of the particle packing is shown on the right hand side of . The particle filling process is reproducible.

