---

title: Method and system for producing metallic iron nuggets
abstract: Method and system for producing metallic nuggets includes providing reducible mixture (e.g., reducible micro-agglomerates; reducing material and reducible iron bearing material; reducible mixture including additives such as a fluxing agent; compacts, etc.) on at least a portion of a hearth material layer. In one embodiment, a plurality of channel openings extend at least partially through a layer of the reducible mixture to define a plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions. Such channel openings may be at least partially filled with nugget separation fill material (e.g., carbonaceous material). Thermally treating the layer of reducible mixture results in formation of one or more metallic iron nuggets. In other embodiments, various compositions of the reducible mixture and the formation of the reducible mixture provide one or more beneficial characteristics.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07641712&OS=07641712&RS=07641712
owner: Nu-Iron Technology, LLC
number: 07641712
owner_city: Charlotte
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051207
---
This application claims priority from provisional application Ser. No. 60 633 886 filed Dec. 7 2004. Application Ser. No. 60 633 886 is hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention was made with support by the Economic Development Administration Grant No. 06 69 04501. The United States government may have certain rights in the invention.

The present invention relates to the reduction of metal bearing material e.g. the reduction of iron bearing material such as iron ore .

Many different iron ore reduction processes have been described and or used in the past. The processes may be traditionally classified into direct reduction processes and smelting reduction processes. Generally direct reduction processes convert iron ores into a solid state metallic form with for example use of shaft furnaces e.g. natural gas based shaft furnaces whereas smelting reduction converts iron ores into molten hot metal without the use of blast furnaces.

Many of the conventional reduction processes for production of direct reduced iron DRI are either gas based processes or coal based processes. For example in the gas based process direct reduction of iron oxide e.g. iron ores or iron oxide pellets employs the use of a reducing gas e.g. reformed natural gas to reduce the iron oxide and obtain DRI. Methods of making DRI have employed the use of materials that include carbon e.g. coal charcoal etc. as a reducing agent. For example coal based methods include the SL RN method described in for example the reference entitled Direct reduction down under the New Zealand story D. A. Bold et al. Iron Steel International Vol. 50 3 pp. 145 and 147 52 1977 or the FASTMET method described in for example the reference entitled Development of FASTMET as a New Direct Reduction Process by Miyagawa et al. 1998 ICSTI IRONMAKING Conference Proceedings pp. 877 881.

Another reduction process in between gas based or coal based direct reduction processing and smelting reduction processing may be referred to as fusion reduction. Fusion reduction processes have been described in for example the reference entitled A new process to produce iron directly from fine ore and coal by Kobayashi et al. I SM pp. 19 22 September 2001 and for example in the reference entitled New coal based process Hi QIP to produce high quality DRI for the EAF by Sawa et al. ISIJ International Vol. 41 2001 Supplement pp. S17 S21. Such fusion reduction processes generally for example involve the following generalized processing steps feed preparation drying furnace loading preheating reduction fusion melting cooling product discharge and product separation.

Various types of hearth furnaces have been described and or used for direct reduction processing. One type of hearth furnace referred to as a rotary hearth furnace RHF has been used as a furnace for coal based production. For example in one embodiment the rotary hearth furnace has an annular hearth partitioned into a preheating zone a reduction zone a fusion zone and a cooling zone located along the supply side and the discharge side of the furnace. The annular hearth is supported in the furnace so as to move rotationally. In operation for example raw material comprising a mixture for example of iron ore and reduction material is charged onto the annular hearth and provided to the preheat zone.

After preheating through rotation the iron ore mixture on the hearth is moved to the reduction zone where the iron ore is reduced in the presence of reduction material into reduced and fused iron e.g. metallic iron nuggets with use of one or more heat sources e.g. gas burners . The reduced and fused product after completion of the reduction process is cooled in the cooling zone on the rotating hearth for preventing oxidation and facilitating discharge from the furnace.

Various rotary hearth furnaces for use in direct reduction processes have been described. For example one or more embodiments of such furnaces are described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 126 718 to Sawa et al. issued 3 Oct. 2000 and entitled Method of Producing a Reduced Metal and Traveling Hearth Furnace for Producing Same. Further for example other types of hearth furnaces have also been described. For example a paired straight hearth PSH furnace is described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 257 879B1 to Lu et al. issued 10 Jul. 2001 entitled Paired straight hearth PSH furnaces for metal oxide reduction as well as a linear hearth furnace LHF described in U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 558 197 filed 31 Mar. 2004 published as US 2005 0229748A1 and entitled Linear hearth furnace system and methods regarding same. 

Natural gas based direct reduced iron accounts for over 90 of the world s DRI production. Coal based processes are generally used to produce the remaining amount of direct reduced iron. However in many geographical regions the use of coal may be more desirable because coal prices may be more stable than natural gas prices. Further many geographical regions are far away from steel mills that use the processed product. Therefore shipment of iron units in the form of metallized iron nuggets produced by a coal based fusion reduction process may be more desirable than use of a smelting reduction process.

Generally metallic iron nuggets are characterized by high grade essentially 100 metal e.g. about 96 to about 97 metallic Fe . Such metallic iron nuggets are desirable in many circumstances for example at least relative to taconite pellets which may contain 30 oxygen and 5 gangue. Metallic iron nuggets are low in gangue because silicon dioxide has been removed as slag. As such with metallic iron nuggets there is less weight to transport. Further unlike conventional direct reduced iron metallic iron nuggets have low oxidation rates because they are solid metal and have little or no porosity. In addition generally such metallic iron nuggets are just as easy to handle as iron ore pellets.

One exemplary metallic iron nugget fusion process for producing metallic iron nuggets is referred to as ITmk3. For example in such a process dried balls formed using iron ore coal and a binder are fed to furnace e.g. a rotary hearth furnace . As the temperature increases in the furnace the iron ore concentrate is reduced and fuses when the temperature reaches between 1450 C. to 1500 C. The resulting products are cooled and then discharged. The cooled products generally include pellet sized metallic iron nuggets and slag which are broken apart and separated. For example such metallic iron nuggets produced in such a process are typically about one quarter to three eighths inch in size and are reportedly analyzed to include about 96 percent to about 97 percent metallic Fe and about 2.5 percent to about 3.5 percent carbon. For example one or more embodiments of such a method are described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 036 744 to Negami et al. entitled Method and apparatus for making metallic iron issued 14 Mar. 2000 and U.S. Pat. No. 6 506 231 to Negami et al. entitled Method and apparatus for making metallic iron issued 14 Jan. 2003.

Further another metallic iron nugget process has also been reportedly used for producing metallic iron. For example in this process a pulverized anthracite layer is spread over a hearth and a regular pattern of dimples is made therein. Then a layer of iron ore and coal mixture is placed and heated to 1500 C. The iron ore is reduced to metallic iron fused and collected in the dimples as iron pebbles and slag. Then the iron pebbles and slag are broken apart and separated. One or more embodiments of such a process are described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 270 552 to Takeda et al. entitled Rotary hearth furnace for reducing oxides and method of operating the furnace issued 7 Aug. 2001. Further for example various embodiments of this process referred to as the Hi QIP process that utilize the formation of cup like depressions in a solid reducing material to obtain a reduced metal are described in U.S. Pat. No. 6 126 718 to Sawa et al.

Such metallic iron nugget formation processes therefore involve mixing of iron bearing materials and pulverized coal e.g. a carbonaceous reductant . For example either with or without forming balls iron ore coal mixture is fed to a hearth furnace e.g. a rotary hearth furnace and heated to a temperature reportedly 1450 C. to approximately 1500 C. to form fused direct reduced iron i.e. metallic iron nuggets and slag. Metallic iron and slag can then be separated for example with use of mild mechanical action and magnetic separation techniques.

Other reduction processes for producing reduced iron are described in for example U.S. Pat. No. 6 210 462 to Kikuchi et al. entitled Method and apparatus for making metallic iron issued 3 Apr. 2001 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. US2001 0037703 A1 to Fuji et al. entitled Method for producing reduced iron published 8 Nov. 2001. For example U.S. Pat. No. 6 210 462 to Kikuchi et al. describes a method where preliminary molding of balls is not required to form metallic iron.

However there are various concerns regarding such iron nugget processes. For example one major concern of one or more of such processes involves the prevention of slag from reacting with the hearth refractory during such processing. Such a concern may be resolved by placing a layer of pulverized coke or other carbonaceous material on the hearth refractory to prevent the penetration of slag from reacting with the hearth refractory.

Another concern with regard to such metallic iron nugget production processes is that very high temperatures are necessary to complete the process. For example as reported such temperatures are in the range of 1450 C. to about 1500 C. This is generally considered fairly high when compared to taconite pelletization carried out at temperatures in the range of about 1288 C. to about 1316 C. Such high temperatures adversely affect furnace refractories maintenance costs and energy requirements.

Yet another problem is that sulfur is a major undesirable impurity in steel. However carbonaceous reductants utilized in metallic iron nugget formation processes generally include sulfur resulting in such an impurity in the nuggets formed.

Further at least in ITmk3 processes a prior ball formation process utilizing a binder is employed. For example iron ore is mixed with pulverized coal and a binder balled and then heated. Such a preprocessing e.g. ball forming step which utilizes binders adds undesirable cost to a metallic iron nugget production process.

Still further various steel production processes prefer certain size nuggets. For example furnace operations that employ conventional scrap charging practices appear to be better fed with large sized iron nuggets. Other operations that employ direct injection systems for iron materials indicate that a combination of sizes may be important for their operations.

A previously described metallic iron nugget production method that starts with balled feed uses balled iron ore with a maximum size of approximately three quarter inch diameter dried balls. These balls shrink to iron nuggets of about three eighths inch in size through losses of oxygen from iron during the reduction process by the loss of coal by gasification with loss of weight due to slagging of gangue and ash and with loss of porosity. Nuggets of such size in many circumstances may not provide the advantages associated with larger nuggets that are desirable in certain furnace operations.

The methods and systems according to the present invention provide for one more various advantages in the reduction processes e.g. production of metallic iron nuggets. For example such methods and systems may provide for controlling iron nugget size e.g. using mounds of feed mixture with channels filled at least partially with carbonaceous material may provide for control of micro nugget formation e.g. with the treatment of hearth material layers may provide for control of sulfur in the iron nuggets e.g. with the addition of a fluxing agent to the feed mixture etc.

One embodiment of a method for use in production of metallic iron nuggets according to the present invention includes providing a hearth including refractory material and providing a hearth material layer on the refractory material e.g. the hearth material layer includes at least carbonaceous material or carbonaceous material coated with Al OH CaFor the combination of Ca OH and CaF . A layer of a reducible mixture is provided on at least a portion of the hearth material layer e.g. the reducible mixture includes at least reducing material and reducible iron bearing material . A plurality of channel openings extend at least partially into the layer of the reducible mixture to define a plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions e.g. one or more of the plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions may include a mound of the reducible mixture that includes at least one curved or sloped portion such as a dome shaped mound or a pyramid shaped mound of the reducible mixture . The plurality of channel openings are at least partially filled with nugget separation fill material e.g. the nugget separation fill material includes at least carbonaceous material . The layer of reducible mixture is thermally treated to form one or more metallic iron nuggets e.g. metallic iron nuggets that include a maximum length across the maximum cross section that is greater than about 0.25 inches and less than about 4.0 inches in one or more of the plurality of the nugget forming reducible material regions e.g. forming a single metallic iron nugget in each of one or more of the plurality of the nugget forming reducible material regions .

In various embodiments the layer of a reducible mixture may be a layer of reducible micro agglomerates e.g. where at least 50 percent of the layer of reducible mixture comprises micro agglomerates having a average size of about 2 millimeters or less or may be a layer of compacts e.g. briquettes partial briquettes compacted mounds compaction profiles formed in layer of reducible material etc. .

Yet further the layer of a reducible mixture on the hearth material layer may include multiple layers where the average size of the reducible micro agglomerates of at least one provided layer is different relative to the average size of micro agglomerates previously provided e.g. the average size of the reducible micro agglomerates of at least one of the provided layers is less than the average size of micro agglomerates of a first layer provided on the hearth material layer .

In addition a stoichiometric amount of reducing material is the amount necessary for complete metallization and formation of metallic iron nuggets from a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material. In one or more embodiments of the method providing the layer of a reducible mixture on the hearth material layer may include providing a first layer of reducible mixture on the hearth material layer that includes a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 70 percent and about 90 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof and providing one or more additional layers of reducible mixture that includes a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 105 percent and about 140 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof.

In yet another embodiment of the method thermally treating the layer of reducible mixture includes thermally treating the layer of reducible mixture at a temperature less than 1450 degrees centigrade such that the reducible mixture in the nugget forming reducible material regions is caused to shrink and separate from other adjacent nugget forming reducible material regions. More preferably the temperature is less than 1400 C. even more preferably the temperature is below 1390 C. even more preferably the temperature is below 1375 C. and most preferably the temperature is below 1350 C.

Yet further in one or more embodiments of the method the reducible mixture may further include at least one additive selected from the group consisting of calcium oxide one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof e.g. limestone sodium oxide and one or more compounds capable of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof. In addition in one or more embodiments the reducible mixture may include soda ash NaCO NaHCO NaOH borax NaF and or aluminum smelting industry slag. Still further one or more embodiments of the reducible mixture may include at least one fluxing agent selected from the group consisting of fluorspar CaF borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag.

Another method for use in production of metallic iron nuggets according to the present invention includes providing a hearth that includes refractory material and providing a hearth material layer on the refractory material e.g. the hearth material layer may include at least carbonaceous material . A layer of reducible micro agglomerates is provided on at least a portion of the hearth material layer where at least 50 percent of the layer of reducible micro agglomerates comprise micro agglomerates having a average size of about 2 millimeters or less. The reducible micro agglomerates are formed from at least reducing material and reducible iron bearing material. The layer of reducible micro agglomerates is thermally treated to form one or more metallic iron nuggets.

In one or more embodiments of the method the layer of reducible micro agglomerates is provided by a first layer of reducible micro agglomerates on the hearth material layer and by providing one or more additional layers of reducible micro agglomerates on the first layer. The average size of the reducible micro agglomerates of at least one of the provided additional layers is different relative to the average size of micro agglomerates previously provided e.g. the average size of the reducible micro agglomerates of at least one of the provided additional layers is less than the average size of micro agglomerates of the first layer .

Further in one or more embodiments of the method the first layer of reducible micro agglomerates on the hearth material layer includes a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 70 percent and about 90 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof and the provided additional layers of reducible micro agglomerates include a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 105 percent and about 140 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof.

Yet further in one or more embodiments of the method providing the layer of reducible micro agglomerates includes forming the reducible micro agglomerates using at least water reducing material reducible iron bearing material and one or more additives selected from the group consisting of calcium oxide one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof sodium oxide and one or more compounds capable of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof. Further the reducible micro agglomerates may include at least one additive selected from the group consisting of soda ash NaCO NaHCO NaOH borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag or at least one fluxing agent selected from the group consisting of fluorspar CaF borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag.

In one preferred embodiment a method for use in production of metallic iron nuggets comprising the steps of providing a hearth comprising refractory material providing a hearth material layer on the refractory material the hearth material layer comprising at least carbonaceous material coated with one of Al OH CaFor the combination of Ca OH and CaF providing a layer of a reducible mixture on at least a portion of the hearth material layer at least a portion of the reducible mixture comprising at least reducing material and reducible iron bearing material the reducible mixture comprising at least one additive selected from the group consisting of calcium oxide one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof sodium oxide and one or more compounds capable of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof forming a plurality of channel openings extending at least partially into the layer of the reducible mixture to define a plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions having a density less than about 2.4 at least partially filling the plurality of channel openings with nugget separation fill material comprising at least carbonaceous material and thermally treating the layer of reducible mixture at a temperature of less than 1450 C. to form one or more metallic iron nuggets in one or more of the plurality of the nugget forming reducible material regions is provided.

Yet another method for use in production of metallic iron nuggets according to the present invention includes providing a hearth that includes refractory material and providing a hearth material layer on at least a portion of the refractory material e.g. the hearth material layer may include at least carbonaceous material . A reducible mixture is provided on at least a portion of the hearth material layer e.g. the reducible mixture includes at least reducing material and reducible iron bearing material . A stoichiometric amount of reducing material is the amount necessary for complete metallization and formation of metallic iron nuggets from a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material. In one embodiment providing the reducible mixture on the hearth material layer includes providing a first portion of reducible mixture on the hearth material layer that includes a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 70 percent and about 90 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof and providing one or more additional portions of reducible mixture that comprise a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 105 percent and about 140 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof. The reducible mixture is then thermally treated to form one or more metallic iron nuggets. For certain applications the hearth layer might not be used or the hearth layer might not contain any carbonaceous material.

In one embodiment of the method a plurality of channel openings extend at least partially into the reducible mixture and define a plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions and further where the channel openings are at least partially filled with nugget separation fill material.

In yet another embodiment of the method providing the first portion of a reducible mixture on the hearth material layer includes providing a first layer of reducible micro agglomerates on the hearth material layer and where providing one or more additional portions includes providing one or more additional layers of reducible micro agglomerates on the first layer where the average size of the reducible micro agglomerates of at least one of the provided additional layers is different relative to the average size of micro agglomerates previously provided.

In another embodiment providing reducible mixture on the hearth material layer includes providing compacts of the reducible mixture. For example a first portion of each of one or more compacts includes a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 70 percent and about 90 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof and one or more additional portions of each of one or more of compacts includes a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 105 percent and about 140 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof.

Yet further in another embodiment of the method the compacts may include at least one of briquettes e.g. three layer briquettes partial briquettes e.g. two layers of compacted reducible mixture balls compacted mounds of the reducible mixture comprising at least one curved or sloped portion compacted dome shaped mounds of the reducible mixture and compacted pyramid shaped mounds of the reducible mixture. In one preferred embodiment the partial briquettes comprise full briquettes cut in half. The reducible mixture may even be multilayered balls of reducible mixture. In one embodiment the mounds have a density of about 1.9 2 the balls have a density of about 2.1 and briquettes have a density of about 2.1. In one embodiment the reducible material has a density less than about 2.4. In a preferred embodiment the reducible material has a density between about 1.4 and 2.2.

Still further yet another method for use in production of metallic iron nuggets is described herein. The method includes providing a hearth that includes refractory material and providing a hearth material layer on at least a portion of the refractory material. The hearth material layer includes at least carbonaceous material. Reducible mixture is provided on at least a portion of the hearth material layer. The reducible mixture includes reducing material reducible iron bearing material one or more additives selected from the group consisting of calcium oxide one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof sodium oxide and one or more compounds capable of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof and at least one fluxing agent selected from the group consisting of fluorspar CaF borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag. The reducible mixture is thermally treated e.g. at a temperature less than about 1450 degrees centigrade to form one or more metallic iron nuggets.

In one or more embodiments of the method the reducible mixture may include at least one additive selected from the group consisting of calcium oxide and limestone. In other embodiments of the method the reducible mixture may include at least one additive selected from the group consisting of soda ash NaCO NaHCO NaOH borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag. Yet further the hearth material layer may include carbonaceous material coated with Al OH CaFor the combination of Ca OH and CaF.

Yet further in one or more embodiments of the method the reducible mixture may include one or more mounds of reducible mixture including at least one curved or sloped portion may include reducible micro agglomerates or multiple layers thereof having different composition may include compacts such as one of briquettes partial briquettes balls compacted mounds of the reducible mixture comprising at least one curved or sloped portion compacted dome shaped mounds of the reducible mixture and compacted pyramid shaped mounds of the reducible mixture or may include balls e.g. dried balls or multiple layered balls.

A system for use in production of metallic iron nuggets is also described herein. For example one embodiment of a system according to the present invention may include a hearth comprising refractory material for receiving a hearth material layer thereon e.g. the hearth material layer may include at least carbonaceous material and a charging apparatus operable to provide a layer of a reducible mixture on at least a portion of the hearth material layer. The reducible mixture may include at least reducing material and reducible iron bearing material. The system further includes a channel definition device operable to create a plurality of channel openings that extend at least partially into the layer of the reducible mixture to define a plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions and a channel fill apparatus operable to at least partially fill the plurality of channel openings with nugget separation fill material e.g. the nugget separation fill material may include at least carbonaceous material . A furnace is also provided that is operable to thermally treat the layer of reducible mixture to form one or more metallic iron nuggets in one or more of the plurality of the nugget forming reducible material regions.

In one or more embodiments of the system the channel definition device may be operable to create mounds of the reducible mixture that include at least one curved or sloped portion e.g. create dome shaped mounds or pyramid shaped mounds of the reducible mixture .

In still yet another method for use in production of metallic iron nuggets the method includes providing a hearth including refractory material and providing a hearth material layer e.g. at least carbonaceous material on at least a portion of the refractory material. Reducible mixture is provided on at least a portion of the hearth material layer. The reducible mixture includes at least reducing material and reducible iron bearing material. A stoichiometric amount of reducing material is the amount necessary for complete metallization and formation of metallic iron nuggets from a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material. At least a portion of the reducible mixture includes the predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 70 percent and about 90 percent of said stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof. The method further includes thermally treating the reducible mixture to form one or more metallic iron nuggets.

In one embodiment of the method providing reducible mixture on at least a portion of the hearth material layer includes providing one or more layers of reducible mixture on the hearth material layer. A plurality of channel openings are defined that extend at least partially into the layer of the reducible mixture and define a plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions. Further the channel openings are at least partially filled with nugget separation fill material e.g. carbonaceous material .

Yet further in one or more embodiments of the method the reducible mixture may include one or more mounds of reducible mixture including at least one curved or sloped portion may include reducible micro agglomerates or multiple layers thereof having different composition may include compacts such as one of briquettes e.g. single or multiple layer briquettes partial briquettes balls compacted mounds of the reducible mixture comprising at least one curved or sloped portion compacted dome shaped mounds of the reducible mixture and compacted pyramid shaped mounds of the reducible mixture or may include balls e.g. dried balls or multiple layered balls.

Yet further in one or more embodiments of the method the reducible mixture may include one or more additives selected from the group consisting of calcium oxide one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof sodium oxide and one or more compounds capable of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof. Further the reducible mixture may include at least one additive selected from the group consisting of soda ash NaCO NaHCO NaOH borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag or at least one fluxing agent selected from the group consisting of fluorspar CaF borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag.

Yet further one embodiment of the method may include providing compacts and yet further providing additional reducing material adjacent at least a portion of the compacts.

In a further embodiment of the invention a reducible mixture comprising reducing material reducible iron bearing material one or more additives selected from the group consisting of calcium oxide one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof sodium oxide and one or more compounds capable of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof and at least one fluxing agent selected from the group consisting of fluorspar CaF borax NaF and aluminum smelting industry slag is provided.

The above summary of the present invention is not intended to describe each embodiment or every implementation of the present invention. Advantages together with a more complete understanding of the invention will become apparent and appreciated by referring to the following detailed description and claims taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawings.

One or more embodiments of the present invention shall generally be described with reference to . Various other embodiments of the present invention and examples supporting such various embodiments shall then be described with reference to .

It will be apparent to one skilled in the art that elements or process steps from one or more embodiments described herein may be used in combination with elements or process steps from one or more other embodiments described herein and that the present invention is not limited to the specific embodiments provided herein but only as set forth in the accompanying claims. For example and not to be considered as limiting to the present invention the addition of one or more additives e.g. fluorspar to the reducible mixture may be used in combination with the provision of the reducible mixture as micro agglomerates the nugget separation fill material in the channels may be used in combination with provision of the reducible mixture as micro agglomerates the molding process for forming the channels and mounds of reducible mixture may be used in combination with nugget separation fill material in the channels and or with provision of the reducible mixture as micro agglomerates etc.

Further various metallic iron nugget processes are known and or have been described in one or more references. For example such processes include the ITmk3 process as presented in for example U.S. Pat. No. 6 036 744 to Negami et al. and or U.S. Pat. No. 6 506 231 to Negami et al. the Hi QIP process as presented in for example U.S. Pat. No. 6 270 552 to Takeda et al. and or U.S. Pat. No. 6 126 718 to Sawa et al. or other metallic nugget processes as described in for example U.S. Pat. No. 6 210 462 to Kikuchi et al. U.S. Patent Application No. US2001 0037703 A1 to Fuji et al. and U.S. Pat. No. 6 210 462 to Kikuchi et al. One or more embodiments described herein may be used in combination with elements and or process steps from one or more embodiments of such metallic nugget processes. For example and not to be considered as limiting to the present invention the addition of one or more additives e.g. fluorspar to the reducible mixture and or any reducible mixture described herein may be used in combination with the provision of the reducible mixture as a preformed ball as the reducible mixture used to fill dimples in a pulverized carbonaceous layer as part of one or more compacts e.g. briquettes or may be used in one or more other various molding techniques as part of such metallic iron nugget formation processes. As such the concepts and techniques described in one or more embodiments herein are not limited to use with only the metallic iron nugget process described generally herein with reference to but may be applicable to various other processes as well.

The present invention as will be described in further detail herein may be used for example to provide one or more of the following benefits or features. For example the present invention may be used to control the metallic iron nugget size as described herein. Conventional dried balls as feed mixtures lead to iron nuggets of small sizes in the order of inches. Use of the mounds of reducible mixture e.g. trapezoidal and dome shaped mounds with channels filled partially with carbonaceous material can increase the iron nugget size to as large as 4 inches across. Various shapes of mounds e.g. trapezoidal mounds may require a longer time to form fully fused iron nuggets than dome shaped mounds of equal size.

Further for example micro agglomeration may be used to minimize dust losses in feeding furnaces e.g. rotary or linear hearth furnaces micro agglomerates may be placed in layers over a hearth layer with respect to size feed composition e.g. stoichiometric percentage of coal may vary etc. and compaction of feed mixtures after placing them on a hearth layer or in one or more embodiments compaction before placement on the hearth such as to form briquettes including one or more layers may be desirable in view of the high COand highly turbulent furnace gas atmospheres particularly in a linear hearth furnace as described herein.

Yet further for example the present invention may be used to control micro nugget formation. As described herein use of excess coal beyond the stoichiometric requirement for metallization of a reducible feed mixture and use of excess lime beyond a predetermined slag composition e.g. a Slag Composition L for the feed mixture has led to an increased amount of micro nuggets.

As described further herein for example Slag Composition L as shown on the CaO SiO AlOphase diagram of and the table of is located in the low fusion temperature trough thereof. Further other slag compositions are shown on the CaO SiO AlOphase diagram of which indicates the slag compositions of A L L and L . However the present invention is not limited to any particular slag composition. For simplicity the description herein uses the defined Slag Composition L in many instances and abbreviations relating thereto to define the general inventive concepts.

The slag compositions are abbreviated by indicating the amounts of additional lime used in percent as a suffix for example L and L which represents that 1 and 2 by weight of lime was added to the feed mixture respectively over that of Slag Composition L . In other words the feed mixture includes an additional 1 and 2 by weight of lime respectively than the feed mixture at Slag Composition L . Further for example the slag compositions are further abbreviated herein to indicate the existence of other elements or compounds in the feed mixture. For example the amount of chemical CaF abbreviated to CF added in percent is indicated as a suffix for example LCF represents that the feed mixture includes 0.25 by weight of CaFwith Slag Composition of L .

The use of hearth layers including coke alumina mixtures as well as Al OH coated coke may be used to reduce such micro nugget formation as described herein. Further for example addition of certain additives such as fluorspar to the feed mixture may reduce the amount of micro nuggets produced during processing of the feed mixture.

Still further for example as described herein the present invention may be used to control the amount of sulfur in iron nuggets produced according to the present invention. It is common practice in the steel industry to increase the basicity of slag by adding lime to slag under reducing atmosphere for removing sulfur from metallic iron for example in blast furnaces. Increasing lime from Slag Composition L to L and L may lower sulfur e.g. from 0.084 to only 0.058 and 0.050 respectively as described herein but increases the fusion temperature as well as the amount of micro nuggets generated as described herein. The use of fluxing additives that lower the slag fusion temperature such as fluorspar was found to lower not only the temperature of iron nugget formation but also to decrease sulfur in the iron nuggets and in particular to be effective in decreasing the amount of micro nuggets.

With increasing fluorspar FS addition for example sulfur in iron nuggets at Slag Compositions LFS and LFS was lowered steadily to as low as 0.013 and 0.009 respectively at fluorspar addition of 4 as described further herein. The use of soda ash particularly in combination with fluorspar was effective in lowering sulfur in iron nuggets but the use of soda ash tended to increase the amount of micro nuggets also as described further herein.

As shown in block of a hearth is provided see . The hearth as shown in may be any hearth suitable for use with a furnace system e.g. such as that shown generally in operable for use in carrying out the metallic iron nugget process as will be described further herein or one or more other metallic nugget processes that incorporate one or more features described herein. For example hearth may be a hearth suitable for use in a rotary hearth furnace a linear hearth furnace e.g. such as a pallet sized for such a furnace as shown in or any other furnace system operable for implementation of metallic iron nugget process.

Generally hearth includes a refractory material upon which material to be processed e.g. feed material is received. For example in one or more embodiments the refractory material may be used to form the hearth e.g. the hearth may be a container formed of a refractory material and or the hearth may include for example a supporting substructure that carries a refractory material e.g. a refractory lined hearth .

In one embodiment for example the supporting substructure may be formed from one or more different materials such as for example stainless steel carbon steel or other metals alloys or combinations thereof that have the required high temperature characteristics for furnace processing. Further the refractory material may be for example refractory board refractory brick ceramic brick or a castable refractory. Yet further for example a combination of refractory board and refractory brick may be selected to provide maximum thermal protection for an underlying substructure.

In one embodiment of the present invention for example a linear hearth furnace system is used for furnace processing such as described in U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 558 197 filed 31 Mar. 2004 published as US 20050229748A1 and the hearth is a container such as a tray e.g. such as shown in . For example such a container may include a relatively thin lightweight refractory bed that is supported in a metal container e.g. a tray . However any suitable hearth capable of providing the functionality necessary for furnace processing may be used according to the present invention.

With further reference to block of and a hearth material layer is provided on hearth . The hearth material layer includes at least one carbonaceous material.

As used herein carbonaceous material refers to any carbon containing material suitable for use as a carbonaceous reductant. For example carbonaceous material may include coal char or coke. Further for example such carbonaceous reductants may include those listed and analyzed in the tables in terms of by weight shown in .

For example as shown in one or more of anthracite low volatile bituminous carbonaceous reductant medium volatile bituminous carbonaceous reductant high volatile bituminous carbonaceous reductant sub bituminous carbonaceous reductant coke graphite and other sub bituminous char carbonaceous reductant materials may be used for the hearth layer . further provides an ash analysis for carbonaceous reductants shown in the tables of . Some low medium and high volatile bituminous coals may not be suitable for use as hearth layers by themselves but may be used as make up materials to pulverized bituminous chars.

The hearth material layer includes a thickness necessary to prevent slag from penetrating the hearth material layer and contacting refractory material of hearth . For example the carbonaceous material may be pulverized to an extent such that it is fine enough to prevent the slag from such penetration. As recognized by one skilled in the art contact of slag during the metallic iron nugget process produces undesirable damage to the refractory material of hearth if contact is not prevented.

As shown by block of the carbonaceous material used as part of the hearth material layer may optionally be treated or otherwise modified to provide one or more advantages as shall be further discussed herein. For example the carbonaceous material of the hearth material layer may be coated with aluminum hydroxide or CaFor the combination of Ca OH and CaF to reduce the formation of micro nuggets as further described herein. According to one or more particularly advantageous embodiments the hearth material layer includes anthracite coke char or mixtures thereof.

In one embodiment the hearth material layer has a thickness of more than 0.25 inches and less than 1.0 inch. Further in yet another embodiment the hearth material layer has a thickness of less than 0.75 inches and more than 0.375 inches.

Further with reference to block of and a layer of reducible mixture is provided on the underlying hearth material layer . The layer of reducible mixture includes at least a reducible iron bearing material and reducing material for the production of iron metal nuggets e.g. other reducible materials would be used for production of other types of metallic nuggets using one or more like processes such as for example use of nickel bearing laterites and garnierite ores for ferronickel nuggets .

As used herein iron bearing material includes any material capable of being formed into metallic iron nuggets via a metallic iron nugget process such as process described with reference to . For example the iron bearing material may include iron oxide material iron ore concentrate recyclable iron bearing material pellet plant wastes and pellet screened fines. Further for example such pellet plant wastes and pellet screened fines may include a substantial quantity of hematite. Yet further for example such iron bearing material may include magnetite concentrates oxidized iron ores steel plant wastes e.g. blast furnace dust basic oxygen furnace BOF dust and mill scale red mud from bauxite processing titanium bearing iron sands manganiferous iron ores alumina plant wastes or nickel bearing oxidic iron ores.

At least in one embodiment such iron bearing material is ground to 100 mesh or less in size for processing according to the present invention. The various examples presented herein use iron bearing material ground to 100 mesh unless otherwise specified. However larger size iron bearing material may also be used. For example pellet screened fines and pellet plant wastes are generally about 0.25 inches in nominal size. Such material may be used directly or may be ground to 100 mesh for better contact with carbonaceous reductants during processing.

In a preferred embodiment for compacts containing coal at 80 of the stoichiometric amount mounds of reducible material have a density of about 1.9 2.0 balls have a density of about 2.1 and briquettes have a density of about 2.1. Further the reducible mixture has a density of less than about 2.4. In one preferred embodiment the density is between about 1.4 and about 2.2.

One or more of the chemical compositions of iron ore shown in the table of i.e. excluding the oxygen content provide a suitable iron bearing material to be processed by a metallic iron nugget process such as process described with reference to . As shown therein three magnetic concentrates three flotation concentrates pellet plant waste and pellet screened fines are shown in chemical composition form.

As used herein the reducing material used in the layer of reducible mixture includes at least one carbonaceous material. For example the reducing material may include at least one of coal char or coke. The amount of reducing material in the mixture of reducing material and reducible iron bearing material will depend on the stoichiometric quantity necessary for completing the reducing reaction in the furnace process being employed. As described further below such a quantity may vary depending on the furnace used e.g. the atmosphere in which the reducing reaction takes place . In one or more embodiments for example the quantity of reducing material necessary to carry out the reduction of the iron bearing material is between about 70 percent and 90 percent of the stoichiometric quantity of reducing material necessary for carrying out the reduction. In other embodiments the quantity of reducing material necessary to carry out the reduction of the iron bearing material is between about 70 percent and 140 percent of the stoichiometric quantity of reducing material necessary for carrying out the reduction.

At least in one embodiment such carbonaceous material is ground to 100 mesh or less in size for processing according to the present invention. In another embodiment such carbonaceous material is provided in the range of 65 mesh to 100 mesh. For example such carbonaceous material may be used at different stoichiometric levels e.g. 80 percent 90 percent and 100 percent of the stoichiometric amount necessary for reduction of the iron bearing material . However carbonaceous material in the range of 200 mesh to 8 mesh may also be used. The use of coarser carbonaceous material e.g. coal may require increased amounts of coal for carrying out the reduction process. Finer ground carbonaceous material may be as effective in the reduction process but the amount of micro nuggets may increase and thus be less desirable. The various examples presented herein use carbonaceous material ground to 100 mesh unless otherwise specified. However larger size carbonaceous material may also be used. For example carbonaceous material of about inch 3 mm in nominal size may be used. Such larger size material may be used directly or may be ground to 100 mesh or less for better contact with the iron bearing reducible material during processing. When other additives are also added to the reducible mixture such additives if necessary may also ground to 100 mesh or less in size.

Various carbonaceous materials may be used according to the present invention in providing the reducible mixture of reducing material and reducible iron bearing material. For example eastern anthracite and bituminous coals may be used as the carbonaceous reductant in at least one embodiment according to the present invention. However in some geographical regions such as on the Iron Range in Northern Minnesota the use of western sub bituminous coal offers an economically attractive alternative as such coals are more readily accessible with the transportation systems already in place plus they are low in cost and low on sulfur. As such western sub bituminous coals may be used in one or more processes as described herein. Further an alternative to the direct use of sub bituminous coals may be to carbonize for example at 900 C. the sub bituminous coal prior to its use.

In one embodiment the reducible mixture has a thickness of more than 0.25 inches and less than 2.0 inches. Further in yet another embodiment the reducible mixture has a thickness of less than 1 inch and more than 0.5 inches. The thickness of the reducible mixture is generally limited and or dependent upon the effective heat penetration thereof and increased surface area of the reducible mixture that allows for improved heat transfer e.g. dome shaped reducible mixture as described herein .

In addition to the reducing material e.g. coal or char and reducible iron bearing material e.g. iron oxide material or iron ore various other additives may optionally be provided to the reducible mixture for one or more purposes as shown by block of . For example additives for controlling slag basicity binders or other additives that provide binder functionality e.g. lime can act as a weak binder in a micro agglomerate configuration described herein when wetted additives for controlling the slag fusion temperature additives to reduce the formation of micro nuggets and or additives for controlling the content of sulfur in resultant iron nuggets formed by the metallic iron nugget process may be used.

For example the additives shown in the table of may be used in one or more embodiments of the layer of reducible mixture . The table of shows the chemical compositions of various additives which include for example chemical compositions such as Al OH bauxite bentonite Ca OH lime hydrate limestone burnt dolomite and Portland cement. However other additives may also be used as will be described further herein such as CaF NaCO fluorspar soda ash etc. One or more of such additives separately or in combination may provide for beneficial results when used in the metallic iron nugget process .

As discussed herein with reference to metallic iron nugget processes that differ in one manner or another from that described with reference to e.g. the ITmk3 process the Hi QIP process etc. the reducible mixture may include the same materials i.e. type of composition but the form of the reducible mixture on the hearth may be different. For example the form that the reducible mixture takes may be a preformed ball may fill dimples in a pulverized carbonaceous layer may be briquettes or other type of compact e.g. including compacted layers etc. As such the composition of the reducible mixture is beneficial to multiple types of metallic iron nugget process and not just the metallic iron nugget process described generally herein with reference to .

With further reference to and in particular block and channel openings are defined or otherwise provided in the layer of reducible mixture to define metallic iron nugget forming reducible material regions as shown for example by the square regions in the top view of . Such a channel definition process is best shown in and described with general reference to . The channel definition provides at least one manner of controlling metallic iron nugget size as described with reference to the various embodiments provided herein.

As shown in channels are provided in the layer of reducible mixture of to provide the formed layer of reducible mixture . Such channels are defined to a depth in the reducible mixture . The depth is defined as the depth extending from an upper surface of the layer of reducible mixture in a direction toward hearth . In one or more embodiments the depth of the channels may extend only part of the distance to the hearth material layer . However in one or more other embodiments the channel depth may extend to the hearth material layer or even into the layer if it is thick enough .

In the embodiment shown in the channel openings defined in the layer of reducible mixture are provided in a manner to form mounds see the dome shaped mound in in each nugget forming reducible material region see defined by the openings . As shown in a matrix of channel openings are created in the layer of reducible mixture . Each of the formed portions or mounds of reducible mixture includes at least one curved or sloped portion . For example the mounds may be formed as pyramids truncated pyramids round mounds truncated round mounds or any other suitable shape or configuration. For example in one embodiment any suitable shape or configuration that results in the formation of one metal nugget in each of the one or more of the nugget forming reducible material regions may be used. In one or more embodiments shapes that provide a large exposed surface area for effective heat transfer are used e.g. dome shaped mounds similar to the shape of the nugget being formed .

Further as would be apparent from the description herein depending upon the shape of the formed portions or mounds channel openings would have shapes or configurations associated therewith. For example if mound was a pyramid structure a truncated pyramid structure or a trapezoidal shaped mound openings may be formed in a V type configuration. One or more of such different types of channel openings are described further herein with reference to .

The channel openings may be formed using any suitable channel definition device. For example one or more various channel definition devices are described with reference to therein.

Further with reference to and as optionally shown in block channel openings are at least partially filled with nugget separation fill material as shown in . The nugget separation fill material includes at least carbonaceous material. For example in one or more embodiments the carbonaceous material includes pulverized coke or pulverized char pulverized anthracite or mixtures thereof.

At least in one embodiment such pulverized material used to fill the channel openings is ground to 6 mesh or less in size for processing according to the present invention. At least in one embodiment such pulverized material used to fill the channel openings is 20 mesh or greater. Finer pulverized material more than 20 mesh e.g. 100 mesh may increase the amount of micro nugget formation. However larger size materials may also be used. For example carbonaceous material of about inch 6 mm in nominal size may be used.

As shown in the depth of each channel is only partially filled with nugget separation fill material . However such channels may be completely filled and in one or more embodiments additional carbonaceous material may be formed as a layer over for example the mounds and above the filled defined channels. In at least one embodiment at least about one quarter of the channel depth is filled with nugget separation fill material . Yet further in another embodiment less than about three quarters of the channel depth is filled with nugget separation fill material . With the channel openings filled with at least carbonaceous material and with formation of generally uniform nugget forming reducible material regions uniform sized nuggets can be produced by the metallic iron nugget process . As will be recognized the larger the nugget forming reducible material regions e.g. the larger the mounds of reducible mixture the larger the nuggets formed by process . In other words nugget size can be controlled.

With the channel openings at least partially filled with nugget separation fill material a formed layer of reducible mixture e.g. mounds may be thermally treated under appropriate conditions to reduce the reducible iron bearing material and form one or more metallic iron nuggets in the one or more defined metallic iron nugget forming reducible material regions as shown in block of . For example as shown in the embodiment of one metallic nugget is formed in each of nugget forming reducible material regions . Such nuggets are generally uniform in size as substantially the same amount of reducible mixture was formed and processed to produce each of the nuggets .

As further shown in resultant slag on hearth material layer is shown with the one or more metallic iron nuggets e.g. slag beads on hearth material layer separated from the iron nuggets or attached thereto . With further reference to block of the metallic nuggets and slag e.g. attached slag beads are discharged from hearth and the discharged metallic nuggets are then separated from the slag block .

The mechanism of iron nugget formation during the thermal treatment block of the formed reducible mixture layer is described herein with reference to . show the effect of time in a reducing furnace i.e. the reducing furnace described herein referred to as the tube furnace at a temperature of 1400 C. on nugget formation. The composition of the reducible mixture included using 5.7 silicon oxide concentrate medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 stoichiometric requirement and slag composition A formed into two separate mounds . Slag composition A can be discerned from the phase diagram of and the table of .

Such a process is quite different from the mechanism proposed and described which uses dried iron ore coal mixture balls such as described in the Background of the Invention section herein. The mechanism used with the balls is reported to involve formation of direct reduced iron by the reduction of carbon containing balls formation of a dense metallic iron shell on the surface of the original round shape with molten slag separated from metal and a large void space inside followed by melting of the iron phase and separation of slag from molten metal.

The metallic iron nugget process may be carried out by a furnace system as shown generally in . Other types of metallic iron nugget processes may be carried out using one or more components of such a system alone or in combination with other appropriate apparatus. The furnace system generally includes a charging apparatus operable to provide a layer of reducible mixture on at least a portion of hearth material layer . The charging apparatus may include any apparatus suitable for providing a reducible mixture onto a hearth material layer . For example a controllable feed chute a leveling device a feed direction apparatus etc. may be used to provide such feed mixture on the hearth .

A channel definition device is then operable e.g. manual and or automatic operation thereof typically automatic in commercial units or systems to create the plurality of channel openings that extend at least partially through the layer of the reducible mixture to define the plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions . The channel definition device may be any suitable apparatus e.g. channel cutting device mound forming press etc. for creating the channel openings in the layer of reducible mixture e.g. forming the mounds pressing the reducible mixture cutting the openings etc. . For example the channel definition device may include one or more molds cutting tools shaping tools drums cylinders bars etc. One or more suitable channel definition devices shall be described with reference to . However the present invention is not limited to any specific apparatus for creating the channel openings in the formation of nugget forming reducible material regions .

The furnace system further includes a channel fill apparatus operable to at least partially fill the plurality of channel openings with nugget separation fill material . Any suitable channel fill apparatus for providing such separation fill material into the channels may be used e.g. manual and or automatic operation thereof . For example a feed apparatus that limits and positions material in one or more places may be used material may be allowed to roll down dome shaped mounds to at least partially fill the openings a spray device may be used to provide material in the channels or an apparatus synchronized with a channel definition device may be used e.g. channels at least partially filled as the mounds are formed .

With the formed reducible material provided on the hearth material layer and with nugget separation fill material provided to at least partially fill the plurality of channel openings a reducing furnace is provided to thermally treat the formed layer of reducible mixture to produce one or more metallic iron nuggets in one or more of the plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions . The reducing furnace may include any suitable furnace regions or zones for providing the appropriate conditions e.g. atmosphere and temperature for processing the reducible mixture such that one or more metallic iron nuggets are formed. For example a rotary hearth furnace a linear hearth furnace or any other furnace capable of performing the thermal treatment of the reducible mixture may be used.

Further as shown in the furnace system includes a discharge apparatus used to remove the metallic nuggets and the slag formed during processing by the furnace system and discharge such components e.g. nuggets and slag from the system . The discharge apparatus may include any number of various discharge techniques including gravity type discharge e.g. tilting of a tray including the nuggets and slag or techniques using a screw discharge device or a rake discharge device. One will recognize that any number of different types of discharge apparatus may be suitable for providing such discharge of the nuggets e.g. iron nugget and slag bead aggregates and the present invention is not limited to any particular configuration thereof. Further a separation apparatus may then be used to separate the metallic iron nuggets from the slag beads . For example any method of breaking the iron nugget and slag bead aggregates may be used such as for example tumbling in a drum screening a hammer mill etc. However any suitable separation apparatus may be used e.g. a magnetic separation apparatus .

One or more different reducing furnaces may be used according to the present invention depending on the application of the present invention. For example in one or more embodiments herein laboratory furnaces were used to perform the thermal treatment. One will recognize that from the laboratory furnaces scaling to mass production level can be performed and the present invention contemplates such scaling. As such one will recognize that various types of apparatus described herein may be used in larger scale processes or production equipment necessary to perform such processes at a larger scale may be used.

In the absence of any other information of the furnace gas composition of iron nugget processes most of the laboratory tests described herein were carried out in an atmosphere of 67.7 Nand 33.3 CO assuming that COin a natural gas fired burner gas would be converted rapidly to CO in the presence of carbonaceous reductants and hearth layer materials by the Boudouard or carbon solution reaction CO C 2CO at temperatures higher than 1000 C. and a CO rich atmosphere would prevail at least in the vicinity of the reducible materials.

While the presence of CO in the furnace atmosphere accelerated the fusion process somewhat as compared to a Nonly atmosphere the presence of COin furnace atmospheres slowed the fusion behaviors of iron nuggets. There was a pronounced effect of COin furnace atmospheres on iron nugget formation at 1325 C. 2417 F. wherein temperature was on the verge of forming fused iron nuggets. The effect of CObecame less pronounced at higher temperatures and in fact the effect became virtually absent over 1400 C. 2552 F. . In the examples given herein unless otherwise indicated salient features of findings are provided as observed mainly in the Nand CO atmosphere.

Two reducing furnaces used to arrive at one or more of the techniques and or concepts used herein include laboratory test furnaces including for example a laboratory tube furnace as shown in and a laboratory box furnace as shown in . Detail regarding such furnaces shall be provided as supplemental information to the one or more exemplary tests described herein. Unless otherwise indicated such laboratory test furnaces were used to carry out the various examples provided herein.

The laboratory tube furnace as used in multiple testing situations described herein includes a 2 inch diameter horizontal tube furnace 16 inch high 20 inch wide 41 inch long with four silicon carbide heating elements rated at 8 kW and West 2070 temperature controller fitted with a 2 inch diameter 48 inch long mullite tube. A schematic diagram thereof is shown in . At one end of the combustion tube a Type R thermocouple and a gas inlet tube is placed and at the other end a water cooled chamber is attached to which a gas exit port and a sampling port are connected. The effluent gas is flared if CO is used and removed to an exhaust duct system. N CO and COwere supplied through the combustion tube in different combinations via respective rotameters to control the furnace atmosphere. Initially an Alundum boat 5 inch long inch wide 7 16 inch high was used.

A typical temperature profile of the tube furnace when the temperature was set at 1300 C. 2372 F. is shown as follows.

Reduction tests were conducted by heating to a temperature in the range of 1325 C. 2417 F. to 1450 C. 2642 F. and holding for different periods of time with a gas flow rate in many of the tests of 2 L min Nand 1 L min CO for atmosphere control. In certain tests the atmosphere was changed to contain different concentrations of CO. The furnace temperature was checked with two different calibration thermocouples and the readings were found to agree within 5 C.

For reduction tests a graphite boat was introduced in the water cooled chamber the gas was switched to either a N CO or N CO COmixture and purged for 10 minutes. The boat was moved into and removed from the constant temperature zone. Then iron nuggets and slag were picked out and the remainder separated on a 20 mesh screen and the oversize and the undersize were magnetically separated. The magnetic fraction of the oversize included mainly metallic iron micro nuggets while the magnetic fraction of the undersize in most cases were observed to include mainly of coke particles with some magnetic materials attached whether from iron ores or from iron bearing impurities of added coal.

Further a laboratory electrically heated box furnace 39 inch high 33 inch wide 52 inch long had four helical silicon carbide heating elements on both sides in each chamber thereof. A total of sixteen 16 heating elements in the two chambers was rated at 18 kW. The box furnace schematic diagram is shown in . The furnace included two 12 inch 12 inch 12 inch heating chambers with the two chambers capable of controlling temperatures up to 1450 C. independently using two Chromalox 2104 controllers. A Type S thermocouple was suspended from the top into the middle of each cavity 4 inch above the bottom floor in each chamber. A typical temperature profile in the second chamber is given as follows 

The temperature variation over a 6 inch long tray was within a few degrees. The furnace was preceded by a cooling chamber 16 inch high 13 inch wide 24 inch long with a side door through which a graphite tray 5 inch wide 6 inch long 1 inch high with a thickness of inch was introduced and a view window at the top. A gas inlet port another small view window and a port for a push rod to move a sample tray into the furnace were located on the outside wall of the chamber. On the side attached to the furnace a flip up door was installed to shield the radiant heat from coming through. A inch hole in the flip up door allowed the gas to pass through and the push rod to move the tray inside the furnace . At the opposite end of the furnace a furnace gas exhaust port a gas sampling port and a port for a push rod to move a tray out of the furnace were located.

To control the furnace atmosphere N CO and COwere supplied to the furnace in different combinations via respective rotameters. Total gas flow could be adjusted in the range of 10 to 50 L min. In most tests graphite trays were used but in some tests trays made of high temperature fiberboards with a thickness of inch were used. After introducing a tray into the cooling chamber the furnace was purged with Nfor 30 minutes to replace the air followed by another 30 minutes with a gas mixture used in a test of either a N CO or a N CO COmixture before the sample tray was pushed into the furnace.

Initially the tray was pushed just inside of the flip up door held there for 3 minutes then into the first chamber for preheating typically at 1200 C. for 5 minutes and into the second chamber for iron nugget formation typically at 1400 C. to 1450 C. for 10 to 15 minutes. After the test the gas was switched to Nand the tray was pushed to the back of the door and held there for 3 minutes and then into the cooling chamber . After cooling for 10 minutes the tray was removed from the cooling chamber for observation.

Then iron nuggets and slag were picked out and the remainder separated on a 20 mesh screen and the oversize and the undersize were magnetically separated. The magnetic fraction of the oversize included mainly metallic iron micro nuggets while the magnetic fraction of the undersize in most cases included mainly coke particles with some magnetic materials whether from iron ores or from iron bearing impurities of added coal. The magnetic fraction of 20 mesh was labeled and is referred to herein as micro nuggets and the 20 mesh was labeled and is referred to herein as 20 mesh mag. . As such as used herein micro nuggets refers to nuggets that are smaller than the parent nugget formed during the process but too large to pass through the 20 mesh screen or in other words the 20 mesh material.

Yet further as previously described herein a linear hearth furnace such as that described in U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 558 197 entitled Linear hearth furnace system and methods filed 31 Mar. 2004 published as US 20050229748A1 may also be used. A summary of the linear hearth furnace described therein is as follows. One exemplary embodiment of such a linear hearth furnace is shown generally in and may be a forty foot long walking beam iron reduction furnace including three heating zones separated by internal baffle walls and also including a final cooling section . The baffle walls are cooled for example by water cooled lintels to sustain the refractory in these environments. As described herein various tests were also run using this linear hearth furnace and results thereof are described with reference to .

Zone is described as an initial heating and reduction zone. This zone may operate on two natural gas fired 450 000 BTU burners capable of achieving temperatures of 1093 C. Its walls and roof are lined with six 6 inches of ceramic fiber refractory rated to 1316 C. Its purpose is to bring samples to sufficient temperature for drying de volatilizing hydrocarbons and initiating the reduction stages. The burners are operated sub stoichiometrically to minimize oxygen levels.

Zone is described as the reduction zone. This zone may operate on two natural gas fired 450 000 BTU burners capable to achieve 1316 C. Its walls and roof are lined with 12 inches of ceramic fiber refractory rated to sustain constant operating temperatures of 1316 C. The reduction of the feed mixture occurs in this zone .

Zone is described as the melting or fusion zone. This zone may operate on two natural gas fired 1 000 000 BTU burners capable to sustain this zone at 1426 C. The walls and roof are lined with 12 of ceramic fiber refractory rated to sustain constant operating temperatures of 1426 C. The function of this zone is to complete the reduction fusing the iron into metallic iron nodules or nuggets . In the event that this furnace is being used to make direct reduced iron or sponge iron the temperatures in this zone would be reduced where complete reduction would be promoted without melting or fusion.

The final zone or cooling zone is a water jacketed section of the furnace approximately eleven 11 feet long. A series of ports have been installed between the third zone and the cooling section so that nitrogen can be used to create a blanket. The purpose of this zone is to cool the sample trays so that they can be safely handled and solidify the metallic iron nuggets for removal from the furnace.

Zones and are controlled individually according to temperature pressure and feed rate making this furnace capable of simulating several iron reduction processes and operating conditions. An Allen Bradley PLC micro logic controller coupled to an Automation Direct PLC for a walking beam mechanism controls the furnace through a user friendly PC interface.

The operation of the furnace under positive pressure allows the control of atmosphere in each of the zones to reduced oxygen levels e.g. to 0.0 . Sample trays are also filled with coke breeze or other carbonaceous hearth material layers to further enhance the furnace atmosphere. High temperature caulking was used to seal seams on all exposed surfaces to minimize air infiltration.

Feed rate is controlled by an Automation Direct PLC controlled hydraulic walking beam mechanism that advances the trays through the furnace . This device monitors time in each zone and advances trays accordingly with the walking beam mechanism while regulating feed rate. Furnace feed rate and position of the trays is displayed on an operating screen through communication with the PLC. A pair of side by side castable refractory walking beams extends the length of the furnace . They are driven forward and back with a pair of hydraulic cylinders operated through the PLC. The beams are raised and lowered through a second pair of hydraulic cylinders that push the beam assemblies up and down a series of inclines wedges on rollers. Activation of the beam mechanism moves them through a total of 5 revolutions or 30 inches per cycle the equivalent of one tray.

Sample trays are manually prepared prior to starting the test. Additional trays may be also used covered with coke or a carbonaceous reductant to regulate the furnace atmosphere. A roll plate platform elevator raised and lowered with a pneumatic cylinder is designed to align sample trays at the feed of the furnace for tray insertion. Raising the elevator pushes open a spring loaded feed door exposing the feed section of the furnace to the atmosphere to insert trays. Trays are inserted into the furnace once the proper height and alignment is achieved. An automated tray feeding system is used to feed sample trays with a pneumatic cylinder.

The walking beam transports trays to the opposite end of the furnace where they are discharged onto a similar platform roller ball plate elevator . A safety mechanism has been installed to monitor the position of the hot trays at the discharge of the furnace. Discharge rollers drive the trays onto the platform elevator where they can be removed or re inserted back into the furnace. The discharge rollers will not function unless trays are in position for discharge platform elevator is in the up position and the walking beams have been lowered to prevent hot trays from accidental discharge. Tiered conveyor rollers are located at the discharge of the furnace to remove and store sample pallets until cool. To re enter trays back into the furnace a return cart has been designed that transports hot trays underneath the furnace back to the platform elevator at the feed end.

The exhaust gas system is connected to an exhaust fan with a VFD controlled by the furnace PLC. Because the exhaust fan is oversized for this application a manually controlled in line damper or pressure control is used to reduce the capacity of the exhaust fan to improve zone pressure control. As a safety precaution a barometric leg into a level controlled water tank is installed between the common header and exhaust fan to absorb any sudden pressure changes. Exhaust gases are discharged from the fan to a forty foot exhaust stack . The exhaust ducts are refractory lined to the exterior walls of the furnace where they transition to high temperature stainless steel RA602CA fitted with water spray nozzles used to cool the waste gases. The temperature of the water gases from each zone is controlled with an in line thermocouple and a manually controlled water flow meter attached to each set of water sprays. The stainless ducts are followed by standard carbon steel once the gases are sufficiently cooled. A thermocouple in the common header is used to monitor the temperature of the exhaust gas and minimize heat to the exhaust fan bearings.

The sample trays or pallets as shown in have inch square refractory lined pans with a flat bottom to be conveyed through the furnace by the walking beam mechanism . The trays framework may be made from a 303 stainless steel alloy or carbon steel. They may be lined with high temperature refractory brick or ceramic fiberboard with sidewalls to contain the feed mixture.

The above described furnace systems are given for exemplary purposes only to further illustrate the nugget formation process and provide certain details on testing and results reported herein. It will be recognized that any suitable furnace system capable of carrying out one or more embodiments of a metallic iron nugget formation process described herein may be used according to the present invention.

As generally described with reference to and the channel openings may be of multiple configurations and depths. As shown in the channel openings form mounds of reducible mixture in each of the nugget forming reducible material regions . With the channel openings extending a depth into the layer of reducible mixture the mounds for example may have a dome or spherical shape. Multiple alternate embodiments for alternate channel opening configurations are shown in as well as in . Further in alternate types of channel definition devices are shown which can be used to form such channel openings e.g. channel openings that are associated with the formation of mounds in each of a plurality of nugget forming reducible material regions .

As shown in the multiple embodiments one will recognize that the channel openings may be formed to extend through the entire reducible mixture layer to the hearth material layer or only partially therethrough. Further one will recognize that the nugget separation fill material may entirely fill each of the channel openings or may only partially fill such openings.

The channel definition device includes a first elongated element and one or more extension elements extending orthogonally from the elongated element . As shown by direction arrows the channel definition device and or the reducible mixture may be moved along both x and y axes to move sufficient material of the reducible mixture to create the channel openings . For example when element and or the reducible mixture is moved in the direction represented by arrow channels are created which are orthogonal to those created when the device is moved in the direction . In one embodiment the elongated element need not move in the direction represented by arrow as the layer of reducible mixture is moving for example to the right at a constant speed such as in a continuous forming process shown in .

The channel definition device includes a first elongated rotating shaft element that includes a plurality of spaced part disc elements mounted orthogonally relative to the elongated shaft element . In one exemplary embodiment the disc elements rotate in place to create grooves when the reducible feed mixture moves in direction . In other words bidirectional arrow indicates rotation of the shaft element and as such the one or more disc elements such that rotation of disc elements when the layer of reducible mixture is moved in the direction produces groove shaped channels in a first direction i.e. in the direction of arrow . In one embodiment the channel definition device further includes one or more flat blades connected to the rotating shaft element between the disc elements . The flat blades e.g. two blades mounted 180 degrees apart as shown in three blades mounted 120 degrees apart etc. plough the reducible mixture in the cross wise direction i.e. orthogonal to the direction of arrow as the layer of reducible mixture is moving for example at a constant speed such as in a continuous forming process shown in .

One will recognize that channel openings extending in direction may be created by the same or a different channel definition device as those created orthogonal thereto. For example channel definition device may be used to create channels along direction whereas the channel device as shown with reference to may be used to form the channels that extend orthogonal thereto. In other words the same or multiple types of channel definition devices may be used to create the channel openings in one or more different alternate channel opening configurations described herein and the present invention is not limited to any particular channel definition device or combination of devices.

In other words the channel definition device includes an elongated element extending along an axis about which the device rotates. One or more mold surfaces are formed at a location radial from axis . As shown in such mold surfaces extend along the entire perimeter at a radial distance from axis and also along axis although not shown . The mold surfaces may be formed in any particular configuration to form the shape of channel openings which correspond directly to the shape of mounds formed in the layer of reducible mixture that is provided on the hearth material layer . One will recognize that the mounds need not be spherically shaped have curved surfaces but may be of any other shape such as a pyramidal molded mound a truncated pyramidal mound etc.

As described herein various channel definition devices may be used to form the mounds and associated channel openings according to the present invention. However in one embodiment dome shaped or substantially spherical mounds such as those shown in and are provided. As shown in such figures the openings extending to a depth within the layer of reducible mixture may extend to the hearth material layer or only partially through the reducible mixture. Further as shown in such figures the channels forming such dome shaped mounds may be partially or entirely filled with the nugget separation fill material. In one particular embodiment the nugget separation fill material is provided in less than about three quarters of the channel depth for the channel openings forming such dome or spherically shaped mounds.

The use of pressure or compaction may be combined with any of the described embodiments herein or as an alternative thereto. For example and as described herein in the formation of the channels or formation of the reducible mixture on the hearth material compaction or pressure e.g. pressing using one or more of the channel definition devices may be used to alter the nugget formation process. Such compacted reducible mixture may be used alone or in combination with nugget separation fill material being provided in openings formed by compaction or pressure.

Further for example a compaction apparatus e.g. a briquetting cylinder or roll or a briquetting press may be used to optimize the size and or shape of the nuggets formed. The compaction apparatus may for example be configured to imprint a pattern into a layer of reducible mixture e.g. iron bearing fines and a reducing material . The deeper the imprint the greater would be the compaction in a particular area. Such compaction may result in greater throughput for the nugget formation process. Further it may be possible to increase the size of nuggets to a point where solidification rates and other physical parameters restrict formation of metallic nuggets and slag separation.

In a uniform temperature environment the areas of greater compaction should enhance heating and diffusion thereby acting as the nucleation and collection site for metallic nuggets providing a manner to locate where a nugget will form on the hearth. Further it may be possible to use the added degree of freedom brought about by the compaction or pressure as a control parameter to counteract the negative effects of a non uniform temperature profile across the hearth that may result as a consequence of furnace geometry e.g. edge effects and heat source location in the furnace. Yet further in addition to use of pressure to control reaction rates i.e. in the formation of metallic nuggets diffusion rates of reducing gases can be varied by using pressure in combination with particle size to control the pathways for gases entering the formed material. Likewise solid state reaction rates of particulates as governed by heat transfer and metallurgical diffusion mechanisms can also be varied.

Various compaction profiles are shown in . However such profiles are only illustrative of the many different compacts that could be formed using pressure and compaction. Compacts refer to any compacted reducible mixture or other feed material that has pressure applied thereto when formed to a desired shape e.g. compaction or pressure used to form mounds on a hearth used to provide one or more compaction profiles in a layer of reducible material or used to form compacted balls or compacted rectangular shaped objects such as dried balls or briquettes that are preformed using compaction or pressure and provided to the hearth for processing . It will be recognized that different pressurization during formation of the compacts may result in different processing characteristics.

Further show various other illustrations of that may use compaction to form the reducible mixture having one or more compositions as described herein. For example show preformed balls e.g. compacted or otherwise formed without compaction or pressure such as with use of a binder material of reducible mixture for use in one or more embodiments of a metallic iron nugget process wherein shows a multiple layered ball of reducible mixture and further wherein shows a multiple layered ball having layers of different compositions. show compaction used to provide compacts e.g. briquettes of reducible mixture for use in one or more embodiments of a metallic iron nugget process wherein shows formation of three layer compacts and further wherein shows formation of two layer compacts. Further show use of compaction e.g. through the molding process for use in providing compacts e.g. briquettes of reducible mixture for use in one or more embodiments of a metallic iron nugget process wherein shows formation of two layer compacts and further wherein shows formation of three layer compacts. are described further herein with reference to using different levels of reducing material e.g. carbonaceous material or other constituents thereof e.g. additives in different layers of the formed reducible mixture.

As shown in one example according to a 12 segment equi dimensional dome shaped wooden mold of 1 inch 1 inch 1 inch deep at the apex in each hollow was fabricated and used to shape a layer of reducible mixture in graphite trays i.e. having a size of 5 inches by 6 inches that included a 5.7 percent SiOmagnetic concentrate and medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 percent of the stoichiometric requirement for metallization at Slag composition A . The reducible mixture was placed in a uniform thickness over a pulverized coke layer and the wooden mold was pressed against the reducible mixture to form the simple dome shaped islands of the reducible mixture as shown in . When the channel openings or grooves between the dome shaped islands of reducible feed mixture are left without any nugget separation fill material or coke and after processing in the box furnace at 1450 C. for 6 minutes in an 80 N 20 CO atmosphere nuggets were formed. However the resulting nugget product after processing included uncontrollable coalescence of molten iron e.g. the nuggets did not separate effectively and were not uniform in size .

As shown in the example of a molded 12 segment pattern of reducible feed mixture including a 5.7 SiOmagnetic concentrate medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric amount at slag composition A was provided. The 12 segment pattern has the grooves thereof fully filled with pulverized coke and was processed in the box furnace at 1450 C. for 6 minutes in an 80 N 20 CO atmosphere. The results of such processing is shown in as will be described below.

As shown therein and also in corresponding when the grooves were not filled or were quarter filled with coke some of the iron nuggets were combined into larger sizes and their sizes could not be controlled. When the grooves were filled to a half level each segment retained its size to form fully fused iron nuggets.

The thermal processing to form the iron nuggets was performed in the electric box furnace at a temperature of 1450 C. for 6 minutes. At 5.5 minutes an iron nugget at the center showed a sign of being on the verge of full fusion. Accordingly it could be concluded that 5.5 minutes was the minimum time required for full fusion with the molded pattern.

The example shown in further show the effect of using hearth nugget separation fill material in the channel openings of reducible mixture layer. Providing such hearth nugget separation fill material in the grooves or channel openings is believed to cause a reducible mixture in each region e.g. a rectangle region of reducible mixture to shrink away from each other and separate into individual iron nuggets. The size of the rectangles and the thickness of the layer of reducible mixture controls the resulting nugget size.

As shown in controlling iron nugget sizes may be accomplished by cutting a rectangular pattern of grooves in a layer of reducible mixture. In this case a mixture including a 5.7 SiOmagnetic concentrate and medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric amount at slag composition A is provided. The degree to which the grooves forming the nugget forming reducible mixture regions need to be filled with carbonaceous material is exemplified by pressing a layer of reducible mixture 16 millimeters thick with 13 millimeter deep grooves to form a 12 square pattern as shown in .

The grooves in the reducible mixture of were left empty and in another test embodiment the grooves were filled with 20 65 mesh coke as shown in . The trays were heated in the box furnace at 1450 C. for 13 minutes in an 80 N 20 CO atmosphere. The results are shown in respectively. Without pulverized coke or carbonaceous material in the grooves some squares shrank to form individual iron nuggets while others combined to form larger iron nuggets. There was little control over the size of iron nuggets when nugget separation fill material e.g. carbonaceous material is not used in the channel openings or grooves. As the individual squares of molten iron spread by its own weight they touched each other and coalesced into larger sizes. The molten iron of larger sizes eventually approaches a constant thickness as determined by a balance between a spreading force due to its own weight and the restraining force due to its surface tension.

As shown in when nugget separation fill material e.g. carbonaceous material such as pulverized coke was placed in the grooves or channel openings individual iron nuggets were kept separated and uniform sized iron nuggets could be obtained. Filling of the grooves with coke particles helped assist each mound of reducible material to form individual molten iron nuggets separately and uniformly.

The above exemplary illustrations provide support for the provision of channel openings in the layer of reducible mixture to define metallic iron nugget forming regions block as described with reference to . Thermal treatment of such shaped regions of reducible material results in one or more metallic iron nuggets.

Further at least in one or more embodiments according to the present invention the channel openings are filled at least partially with nugget separation fill material e.g. carbonaceous material block as described in the examples herein. With use of such channel openings and nugget separation fill material therein as shown for example in substantially uniformly sized metallic iron nuggets are formed in each nugget forming reducible material region defined by the channel openings .

In one embodiment and as shown in each of the one or more metallic iron nuggets includes a maximum cross section. One or more of the metallic iron nuggets includes a maximum length across the maximum cross section that is greater than about 0.25 inch and less than about 4.0 inch. In yet another embodiment a maximum length across the maximum cross section is greater than about 0.5 inch and less than about 1.5 inch.

Further as shown and described with reference to the carbonaceous material of the hearth material layer generally provided according to block may be modified in one or more different manners. As previously described the carbonaceous material is generally fine enough so slag does not penetrate the hearth material layer so as to react undesirably with the refractory material of hearth .

The hearth material layer e.g. the size distribution thereof may influence the amount of mini nuggets and micro nuggets generated during the reduction processing of the layer of reducible mixture . For example at least in one embodiment the hearth material layer includes a pulverized coke layer having a size distribution of 65 mesh fraction of the as ground coke. In another embodiment 28 mesh fraction of as ground coke is used as the hearth material layer. With the use of mounds such as shown in e.g. dome shaped patterns of reducible mixture on such a hearth material layer as an island of the reducible mixture shrinks to form a nugget through thermal processing some magnetic concentrate is trapped in the interstices of the hearth material layer e.g. pulverized coke layer and forms micro nuggets as previously defined herein.

Due to the presence of excess carbon the micro nuggets do not coalesce with the parent nugget in the nugget forming reducible material region or among themselves. Such formation of micro nuggets is undesirable and ways of reducing micro nugget formation in processes such as those described according to the present invention are desirable.

While the hearth material layer which may include pulverized coke may generate a large quantity of micro nuggets when dome shaped mound patterns are used a pulverized alumina layer has been found to minimize their amount. Although the use of alumina demonstrates the role played by a carbonaceous hearth material layer in generating micro nuggets pulverized alumina cannot be used as a hearth material layer because of its reactiveness with slag.

In order to minimize the generation of micro nuggets when channel opening defined mounds are processed according to the present invention the effect of different types of hearth material layers have been compared indicating that the hearth material layer or carbonaceous material thereof may be optionally modified block of for use in the metallic iron nugget process according to the present invention. The amount of micro nuggets formed can be estimated by micro nuggets 100 The results of one or more exemplary illustrative test embodiments are shown in the table of . In the table it is noted that a mixture of coke and alumina or Al OH coated coke may be used according to the present invention to decrease the percentage of micro nuggets formed in the metallic iron nugget process . The results shown in the table of were a result of illustrative test embodiments as follows.

For the 12 elongated domes data shown in a 12 segment elongated dome shaped pattern of feed mixture with grooves filled with pulverized coke to a half level was heated at 1450 C. 2642 F. in the box furnace for 5.5 minutes in a N CO atmosphere to produce individual fully fused iron nuggets. Only the hearth material layer was modified as shown in the table of .

For the 12 and 16 balls data of an equal weight of a feed mixture at Slag Composition A was used to form equal sized balls and such balls were processed by heating at 1450 C. 2642 F. in the box furnace for 5.5 minutes in a N CO atmosphere to produce individual fully fused iron nuggets. The processing of the balls resulted in very little micro nugget formation e.g. 0.4 and 0.8 .

Two extremes of the effect of hearth layer materials are contrasted in the table of . While the hearth material layer of pulverized coke generated a large amount of micro nuggets 13.9 a pulverized alumina layer minimized the amount 3.7 of micro nuggets. However as indicated above pulverized alumina may not be used as a hearth layer material in practice.

The results when only coke and an equal weight 50 50 mixture of coke and alumina were used as the hearth layer are compared. The amount of micro nuggets was reduced to less than a half by the presence of alumina in the hearth material layer.

Further pulverized coke was coated with Al OH by mixing 40 g of coke in an aqueous slurry of Al OH dried and screened at 65 mesh to remove excess Al OH . The coke acquired 6 by weight of Al OH . The Al OH coated coke was used as the hearth material layer. The amount of micro nuggets notably decreased 3.9 .

Yet further pulverized coke was coated with Ca OH by mixing 40 g of coke in an aqueous slurry of Ca OH dried and screened at 65 mesh to remove excess Ca OH . The coke acquired 12 by weight of Ca OH . The Ca OH coated coke was used as the hearth material layer. Apparently the coating of Ca OH had essentially no effect on the generation of micro nuggets 14.2 . It may be speculated that an addition of CaFto Ca OH in the coating would minimize the amount of micro nuggets by lowering the fusion of high lime slag as in the case of Slag Composition LFS see .

As described previously with reference to the layer of reducible mixture for use in the metallic iron nugget process according to the present invention may include one or more additives in combination with the reducing material and the reducible iron bearing material e.g. reducible iron oxide material . One method for providing the reducible mixture with optional additives is shown in the block diagram of . The method includes providing a mixture of at least reducing material e.g. carbonaceous material such as coke or charcoal and reducible iron oxide material e.g. iron bearing material such as shown in block . Optionally for example calcium oxide or one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof block may be added to the reducible mixture. Further optionally sodium oxide or one or more compounds of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition thereof may be provided block in combination with the other components of the reducible mixture. Yet further one or more fluxing agents may optionally be provided for use in the reducible mixture block .

The one or more fluxing agents that may be provided for use with the reducible mixture block may include any suitable fluxing agent for example an agent that assists in the fusion process by lowering the fusion temperature of the reducible mixture or increases the fluidity of the reducible mixture. In one embodiment calcium fluoride CaF or fluorspar e.g. a mineral form of CaF may be used as the fluxing agent. Further for example borax NaF or aluminum smelting industry slag may be used as the fluxing agent. With respect to the use of fluorspar as the fluxing agent an amount of about 0.5 to about 4 by weight of the reducible mixture may be used.

Use of fluorspar for example as well as one or more other fluxing agents lowers the fusion temperature of the iron nuggets being formed and minimizes the generation of micro nuggets. Fluorspar was found to lower not only the nugget formation temperature but also to be uniquely effective in decreasing the amount of micro nuggets generated.

In an attempt to improve sulfur removal capacity of slag as shall be described further herein the level of lime or one or more other compounds capable of producing calcium oxide is typically increased beyond a composition L as shown on the CaO SiO AlOphase diagram of which indicates the slag compositions of A L L and L . As previously noted composition L is located in the low fusion temperature trough in the CaO SiO AlOphase diagram. Further as previously indicated the slag compositions are abbreviated by indicating the amounts of additional lime used in percent as a suffix for example L and L indicate lime addition of 1 and 2 respectively over that of Composition L see the table of . The amount of chemical CaF abbreviated to CF added in percent was also indicated as a suffix for example LCF which represents that 0.25 by weight of CaFwas added to a feed mixture with Slag Composition of L .

Generally shows the effect of CaFaddition to feed mixtures which include a 5.7 SiOmagnetic concentrate medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric requirement for metallization and slag composition L on weight distributions of products in a 2 segment pattern in boats heated at 1400 C. for 7 minutes in a N CO atmosphere. An addition of 0.25 by weight of CaFto a feed mixture with Slag Composition L decreased the amount of micro nuggets from 11 to 2 and the amount remained minimal at about 1 with the addition of CaFin the amount of about 2 by weight.

Generally shows the effect of CaFand or fluorspar abbreviated FS addition to feed mixtures that include a 5.7 SiOmagnetic concentrate medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric requirement for metallization and slag composition of increasing lime composition on the amount of micro nuggets generated. The samples in a 2 segment pattern in boats were heated at different temperatures for 7 minutes in a N CO atmosphere e.g. 1400 C. 1350 C. and 1325 C. . It is shown that fluorspar and CaFbehaved essentially identical in lowering the temperature of forming fully fused iron nuggets and in minimizing the formation of micro nuggets. In the table it is noted that an addition of fluorspar lowered the operating temperature by 75 C. Minimum temperature for forming fully fused iron nuggets decreased to as low as 1325 C. by fluorspar addition of about 1 to about 4 by weight. Fluorspar addition also minimized the generation of micro nuggets to about 1 .

Generally shows the effect of fluorspar addition on analytical results of iron nuggets formed from feed mixtures that included a 5.7 SiOmagnetic concentrate medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric requirement for metallization and slag composition L L and L . The samples in a 2 segment pattern in boats were heated at 1400 C. for 7 minutes in a N CO atmosphere.

Although fluorspar is reported to be not particularly an effective desulfurizer in steelmaking slag shows that with increasing fluorspar addition sulfur in iron nuggets was lowered more effectively at Slag Compositions L and L than at L . At Slag Compositions L and L iron nuggets analyzed including 0.058 by weight sulfur and 0.050 by weight sulfur respectively while sulfur decreased steadily to as low as 0.013 and 0.009 by weight respectively at fluorspar addition of 4 . Therefore the use of fluorspar not only lowered the operating temperature and the sulfur in iron nuggets but also showed an unexpected benefit of minimizing the generation of micro nuggets.

Further with reference to calcium oxide and or one or more compounds capable of producing calcium oxide upon thermal decomposition as shown in block may be used. For example calcium oxide and or lime may be used as an additive to the reducible mixture. Generally increased basicity of slag by addition of lime is a conventional approach for controlling sulfur in the direct reduction of iron ores. Increased use of lime from slag compositions L to Ldecrease sulfur in iron nuggets from 0.084 to 0.05 . Further decreases in sulfur content may become desirable for certain applications. Increased use of lime however requires increasingly higher temperatures and longer time at temperature for forming fully fused iron nuggets. As such a substantial amount of lime is not desirable as higher temperatures also result in less economical production of metallic iron nuggets.

As further shown in sodium oxide and or one or more compounds capable of producing sodium oxide upon thermal decomposition may be used in addition to lime block such as for example to minimize sulfur in the formed metallic iron nuggets. For example soda ash NaCO NaHCO NaOH borax NaF and or aluminum smelting industry slag may be used for minimizing sulfur in the metallic iron nuggets e.g. used in the reducible mixture .

Soda ash is used as a desulfurizer in the external desulfurization of hot metal. Sodium in blast furnace feed materials recirculates and accumulates within a blast furnace leading to operational problems and attack on furnace and auxiliary equipment lining. In rotary hearth furnaces recirculation and accumulation of sodium is less likely to occur and as such larger amounts of sodium may be tolerated in feed materials than in blast furnaces.

The table of shows the effect of NaCOand CaFadditions on sulfur analysis of iron nuggets at different levels of lime addition the iron nuggets formed from feed mixtures that included a 5.7 SiOmagnetic concentrate medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric requirement for metallization and slag composition LCSor LFS . The feed mixtures were heated in the tube furnace at 1400 C. for 7 minutes in a N CO atmosphere.

An addition of NaCOwithout CaFdecreased sulfur in iron nuggets as effectively as or even more effectively than the CaF but the amount of micro nuggets generated increased as shown in . When CaFwas used along with NaCO the sulfur content in iron nuggets decreased even further and the amount of micro nuggets remained minimal at about 1 . Another point of note was that the effect of CaFin lowering the fusion temperature of iron nuggets was more pronounced at Slag Compositions L L and L than at Slag Compositions L and L. This analytical data shows that at least in this embodiment decrease in sulfur was more pronounced with soda ash than with increased addition of lime.

The table of shows the effect of temperature on analytical results of iron nuggets formed from feed mixtures. The feed mixture included a 5.7 SiOmagnetic concentrate medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric requirement for metallization and slag composition LFSSC . The feed mixture was heated in the tube furnace at the indicated temperatures for 7 minutes in a N CO atmosphere. As shown in the table of sulfur in the iron nuggets decreased markedly with decreasing temperature from 0.029 S at 1400 C. to 0.013 S at 1325 C. An addition of NaCOtogether with 1 2 CaFnot only lowers sulfur in iron nuggets to well below 0.05 but also lowers the operating temperature and minimizes the generation of micro nuggets. Lowering the process temperature therefore appears to have an additional advantage of lowering sulfur in addition to lowering energy cost and maintenance.

In previous and various metallic iron reduction processes such as those using formed and or dried balls as presented in the Background of the Invention section herein carbonaceous reductants are typically added in an amount greater than the theoretical amount required to reduce the iron oxides for promoting carburizing of metallic iron in order to lower the melting point. The amount of carbonaceous reductant in the balls is thus claimed to include an amount required for reducing iron oxide plus an amount required for carburizing metallic iron and an amount of loss associated with oxidation.

In many of the processes described herein the stoichiometric amount of reducing material is also necessary for complete metallization and formation of metallic iron nuggets from a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material. For example in one or more embodiments the reducible mixture may include the predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 70 percent and about 125 percent of the stoichiometric amount of reducing material e.g. carbonaceous reductant necessary for complete metallization thereof e.g. where the reducible feed mixture has a uniform coal content throughout the reducible mixture such as when formed in mounds .

However in one or more embodiments according to the present invention use of the amount of carbonaceous reductant in the amount of the stoichiometric amount needed for complete metallization may lead to the break up of the reducible mixture into mini nuggets and the generation of a large amount of micro nuggets as shown in . show the effect of stoichiometric coal levels on nugget formation where feed mixture including 5.7 SiOconcentrate medium volatile bituminous coal and at slag composition A is used. The feed mixture is heated in a tube furnace at 1400 C. for 10 minutes in a N CO atmosphere. As shown therein a 100 level and or excess addition of carbonaceous reductants beyond the stoichiometric requirements may result in the formation of mini and micro nuggets.

As seen in the addition of about 70 to about 90 of the stoichiometric amount minimized the formation of micro nuggets. Carbon needed for further reduction and carbonizing molten metal would then come from for example CO in the furnace atmosphere and or from the underlying carbonaceous hearth material layer .

The control of the amount of reducing material in the reducible mixture based on the stoichiometric amount necessary to complete the metallization process as well as the use of various additives described herein may be applied to other nugget formation processes as well as the methods described with reference to . For example preformed ball methods compacted or uncompacted but otherwise formed or formation of compacts e.g. mounds formed by pressure or compaction or briquettes may use such reductant control techniques and or additives techniques described herein.

For example compacts that employ 70 to 90 of carbonaceous reductant needed for complete metallization in a suitable reducible mixture may be used. For example such compacts may have the appropriate additions of flux and limestone and or may further include auxiliary reducing agent on the hearth or partially covering the compacts to effectively provide nugget metallization and size control. In other words the stoichiometric control described herein along with the variation in compositions e.g. additives lime etc. provided herein may be used with compacts e.g. briquettes partial briquettes compacted mounds etc. . Use of compacts may alleviate any need to use nugget separation material as described with reference to . For example control of pressure temperature and gas diffusion in a briquette or other type of compact may provide such benefits.

However as described above such data shown in result from thermal treatment using the electric tube furnace in a N CO atmosphere described herein and generally does not take into consideration the atmosphere in a natural gas fired furnace e.g. a linear hearth furnace such as described herein . In such a linear hearth furnace atmosphere the atmosphere may include 8 10 carbon dioxide and 3 4 carbon monoxide and highly turbulent gas flow in the highest temperature zone thereof. This is different than the electrical tube and box furnace where the atmosphere is being controlled with introduction of components. As such various tests were run in a linear hearth furnace such as that described herein with reference to and also as provided below. The tests and results therefrom are summarized herein with reference to .

The tests were run using a 40 ft. long natural gas fired linear hearth furnace including three heating zones and a cooling section like that described generally with reference to . Sample trays or pallets as illustrated in used in the tests were made from a 30 inch square carbon steel framework and were lined with high temperature fiber board with sidewalls to contain samples e.g. the reducible mixture and products resulting therefrom after completion of processing . The trays were conveyed through the furnace by a hydraulically driven walking beam system as described with reference to . The arrow in indicates the direction of pallet movement through the furnace.

The reducible feed mixture on the tray was formed in the shape of 6 segment domes for the laboratory box furnace tests placed on a 10 mesh coke layer in each of the four quadrants of the tray labeled as 1 through 4 . Each of the domes in the 6 6 segment quadrant had the dimensions of substantially 1 inches wide by 2 inches long and were 11 16 inches high and contained medium volatile bituminous coal in indicated percentages see various test examples below of the stoichiometric amount and at the indicated see various test examples below Slag Composition.

Two areas of consideration with regard to the products resulting from the linear hearth furnace tests were the amount of sulfur in the metallic iron nuggets formed by the process and the amount of micro nugget formation. The laboratory tube and box furnace tests described herein indicated that Slag Composition LFS and the use of medium volatile bituminous coal at 80 of the stoichiometric amount minimized sulfur in iron nuggets and minimized micro nugget formation. However linear hearth furnace tests revealed that unexpectedly high COlevels and highly turbulent furnace gas next to the feed being processed consumed much of the added coal e.g. added reducing material which was added to the reducible iron bearing material in Zones 1 and 2 and not enough reductant e.g. reducing material was left for carburizing and melting the metallic iron in the high temperature zone Zone 3 . Use of coal in the amount of 105 to 125 percent of the stoichiometric amount was necessary for forming fully fused metallic iron nuggets as shown by the Tests 14 and 17 provided below.

In linear hearth furnace Test 14 a pallet having an arrangement of different feed mixtures in 6 segment domes was used such as generally shown in . The feed mixture included medium volatile bituminous coal in the quadrant indicated percentages of the stoichiometric amount and at Slag Composition LFS placed on a 10 mesh coke layer. The quadrant indicated percentages were quadrant 1 110 coal quadrant 2 115 coal quadrant 3 120 coal and quadrant 4 125 coal.

In linear hearth furnace Test 17 a pallet having an arrangement of different feed mixtures in 6 segment domes was used such as generally shown in . The feed mixture included medium volatile bituminous coal in the quadrant indicated percentages of the stoichiometric amount and at Slag Compositions LFS and LFS placed on a 10 mesh coke layer. The quadrant indicated percentages were quadrant 1 115 coal 2 fluorspar quadrant 2 110 coal 2 fluorspar quadrant 3 105 coal 2 fluorspar quadrant 4 115 coal 3 fluorspar.

Iron nuggets formed in Tests 14 and 17 using coal additions of 105 to 125 of the stoichiometric amount and Slag Compositions of LFS . shows the resulting products from Test 17. Typical gas compositions showed that when Owas low COwas about 10 and CO gradually increased from 2 to 4 . Such data is provided in which shows analytical results of furnace gases provided for the zones in the linear hearth furnace along with the temperature of such zones for Test 17. The same temperatures were used in the zones during Test 14.

Concentrations of CO expressed as percentages of CO CO were plotted in the equilibrium concentration diagrams of iron oxide reduction and carbon solution Boudouard reactions as shown in . The CO concentration in Zone 1 1750 F. was in the stability region of FeO and those in Zones 2 2100 F. and Zone 3 2600 F. were in the low range of the stability region of FeO. All the points were well below the carbon solution reaction supporting a view that added coal was rapidly lost in the linear hearth furnace. The gas sampling ports of the linear hearth furnace were located on the furnace wall at about 8 inches above pallet surfaces. Because of the high turbulence of furnace gases the CO concentrations of 4 would represent a well mixed value. The arrow at 2600 F. in indicates the increase in CO with time in Zone 3.

Analytical results of iron nuggets and slags of linear hearth furnace Tests. 14 and 17 are given in along with such results for another Test 15. In linear hearth furnace Test 15 a pallet having an arrangement of feed mixtures in domes was used such as generally shown in . The feed mixture of Test 15 included medium volatile bituminous coal at 115 and 110 of the stoichiometric amount and at Slag Compositions LFS placed on a 10 mesh coke layer.

As shown in sulfur in the iron nuggets ranged 0.152 to 0.266 or several times to even an order of magnitude higher than those in iron nuggets formed in the laboratory tube and box furnaces with the same feed mixtures as shown and described previously with reference to . The slags were analyzed to confirm that they were indeed high in lime. Though the CaO SiOratios ranged from 1.48 to 1.71 it was noted that the slags were high in FeO ranging from 6.0 to 6.7 . The FeO analyses of slags in the laboratory tube and box furnaces under identical slag compositions analyzed less than 1 FeO. The high COand highly turbulent furnace gas in the linear hearth furnace e.g. resulting from the use of gas burners caused the formation of high FeO slags which apparently was responsible for higher sulfur in iron nuggets by interfering with de sulfurizing. The use of an increased percentage of coal as well as the use of high sulfur coke 0.65 S as a hearth layer as compared to low sulfur coke 0.40 S in the laboratory tests might also have contributed to high sulfur in the iron nuggets.

In analytical results of iron nuggets and slag of linear hearth furnace Tests 14 15 and 17 along with additional Tests 21 and 22 are shown. Carbon and sulfur in iron nuggets and iron FeO and sulfur in slags for such Tests are summarized. In linear hearth furnace Tests 21 and 22 a pallet having an arrangement of different feed mixtures in 6 segment domes was used such as generally shown in . The feed mixture included medium volatile bituminous coal in the indicated percentages of the stoichiometric amount as shown in and at the indicated Slag Compositions as shown in placed on a 10 mesh coke layer. The temperature in Zone 3 was set of 25 F. higher at 2625 F. in Tests 21 and 22.

As shown in the FeO in slags was halved when a fluorspar addition was increased to 2 with attendant decrease in sulfur in iron nuggets. In view of the results of Test 17 with a fluorspar addition of 2 the lower FeO might have been the results of a higher temperature of 2625 F. 1441 C. .

As shown in there is a difference between the CO concentrations at 2600 F. 2427 C. and 2625 F. 1441 C. . The initial numbers are the CO readings when the temperature of the furnace recovered to 2600 F. The CO concentrations increased asymptotically with time and approached the final numbers towards the end of the tests. It is apparent that both the initial and final numbers are higher at 2600 F. than at 2625 F. With an increase in 25 F. in temperature the burners were putting out more combustion gas to maintain the temperature and hence diluted the CO generated by the carbon solution reaction thereby hindering the carburizing of metallic iron. In fact the products at 2625 F. appeared to form less fully fused iron nuggets than at 2600 F. Thus suppressing the movement of furnace gas may be necessary.

The amounts of micro nuggets in the linear hearth furnace tests were also large e.g. in the range of 10 to 15 as summarized in . The table of shows the effects of the levels of fluorspar and coal additions as well as of temperature. There were no noticeable parameters that correlated with micro nugget formation. In the laboratory tube and box furnace tests the amounts of micro nuggets at Slag Composition LFS were less than a few percent as shown and described with reference to . High COand highly turbulent furnace gas may require use of coal in excess of the stoichiometric amount and coal in the feed mixtures near the hearth layer of coke may have remained high during processing thereby causing large amounts of micro nuggets to form.

In view of the above in one embodiment of the present invention use of a feed mixture with a sub stoichiometric amount of coal next to the hearth layer to minimize micro nugget formation which is overlaid by a feed mixture containing coal in excess of the stoichiometric amount to allow for the loss by the carbon solution reaction is used. In other words a stoichiometric amount of reducing material e.g. coal is necessary for complete metallization and formation of metallic iron nuggets from a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material the reducing material e.g. coal and the iron bearing material providing a reducible feed mixture for processing according to one or more embodiments described herein. For certain applications of a feed mixture with a sub stoichiometric amount of carbonaceous material the hearth layer might not be used or the hearth layer might not contain any carbonaceous material.

One embodiment according to the present invention may include using reducible feed mixture that includes a first layer of reducible mixture on the hearth material layer that has a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material but only between about 70 percent and about 90 percent of the stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof so as to reduce the potential for formation of micro nuggets e.g. such as suggested when the processing was accomplished using the box and tube furnaces . The predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material may be determined and varied dynamically at the time the reducible iron bearing material is placed on the hearth layer. Subsequently one or more additional layers of reducible mixture that include a predetermined quantity of reducible iron bearing material and between about 105 percent and about 140 percent of the stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization thereof would be used. As such the reducible feed mixture would include layers of mixture having different stoichiometric amounts of reducing material e.g. the stoichiometric percentage increasing as one moves away from the hearth layer .

As discussed above in certain furnaces e.g. such as natural gas fired furnaces with high COand highly turbulent gas atmospheres added carbonaceous material e.g. coal in feed mixtures e.g. such as those reducible mixtures described herein is lost by the carbon solution Boudouard reaction in certain zones of the furnace e.g. pre heating and reduction zones . To compensate for the loss it may be necessary to add reducing material e.g. carbonaceous material in excess of the stoichiometric amount necessary for complete metallization thereof. However also as described herein such an addition of reducing material e.g. coal in excess of the stoichiometric amount may lead to formation of large amounts of micro nuggets. Such micro nugget formation appears to be related to the amount of reducing material in an area near the hearth layer that remains high during processing.

As indicated herein an addition of the reducing material somewhat below the stoichiometric amount minimizes the formation of such micro nuggets. As such a feed mixture e.g. a reducible mixture with a sub stoichiometric amount of reducing material e.g. coal next to the hearth layer overlaid with reducible mixture containing reducing material in excess of the stoichiometric amount necessary for complete metallization to minimize micro nugget formation is described herein. Further the loss of added reducing material e.g. coal during processing by the carbon solution reaction may be minimized by compaction of the reducible mixture in various ways e.g. formation of compacts or briquettes from the reducible mixture . show various ways to form feed mixture e.g. reducible mixture by compaction while also incorporating the idea of using a sub stoichiometric amount reducing material in an area near the hearth layer. For example such formed reducible mixture may include any composition described herein or may include other feed mixture compositions that meet the requirements of at least one sub stoichiometric portion of material and at least one portion of material that includes an amount of reducing material in excess of the stoichiometric amount of reducing material necessary for complete metallization of the reducible mixture.

In one embodiment two layer balls having a size that is inch or less in diameter are made. With respect to inch or less diameter balls for example an outer layer having a thickness of for example 1 16 inch amounts to about 40 percent or more of the total weight of the ball in the outer layer while a thickness of inch amounts to about 60 percent or more of the total weight. As such with this amount of the outer layer having a sub stoichiometric amount of reducing material e.g. between 70 and 90 of the stoichiometric amount necessary for complete metallization the central core i.e. inner portion would need to be appreciably higher in reducing material e.g. coal content than for example when mounds including multiple layers are used e.g. the central core may need to be higher than 125 percent of the stoichiometric amount necessary for complete metallization . In one embodiment the interior of the ball is formed of reducible mixture containing reducing material in excess of 105 percent of the stoichiometric amount necessary for complete metallization but less than about 140 percent .

As shown in the domed shaped compacts include portions formed from three layers e.g. briquettes formed at room temperature . The two outside or top and bottom layers are formed of reducible mixture with a sub stoichiometric amount of reducing material e.g. between 70 and 90 of the stoichiometric amount necessary for complete metallization while the middle layer e.g. the interior layer is formed of reducible mixture containing reducing material in excess of the stoichiometric amount necessary for complete metallization e.g. greater than 100 such as greater than 100 but less than about 140 . With the compact formed in such a manner a face e.g. outside layer including a feed mixture with a sub stoichiometric amount of reducing material e.g. coal will be next to the hearth layer to minimize micro nugget formation. In one embodiment each portion of the device shown for use in forming the compacts may be similar to that described with reference to .

In one embodiment the compacts are formed using a press such as that shown in but with different shaped molding surfaces. For example in one embodiment the compacts as shown in are formed by high temperature e.g. 700 C. to 1000 C. pressing of the reducible mixture. Certain types of reducing material e.g. coal may soften at some temperature and act as a binder or use of some low melting point additives may assist in developing less permeable compacts. For example one or more of the following low melting point additives may be used borax melting point 741 C. sodium carbonate melting point 851 C. sodium disilicate melting point 874 C. sodium fluoride melting point 980 997 C. and sodium hydroxide melting point 318.4 C. .

One will recognize that various shapes of the compacts may be used while still maintaining the benefit of having feed mixture with a sub stoichiometric amount of reducing material e.g. coal next to the hearth layer to minimize micro nugget formation. The configurations described herein are given for illustration only.

With further reference to the layer of reducible mixture provided as generally shown by block may be provided in one or more various manners e.g. pulverized coal mixed with iron ore . As shown in the reducible mixture may be provided by forming micro agglomerates block according to the micro agglomerate formation process. At least in one embodiment according to the present invention the reducible mixture is a layer of reducible micro agglomerates. Further at least in one embodiment at least 50 of the layer of reducible micro agglomerates includes micro agglomerates having a average size of about 2 millimeters or less.

The micro agglomerates are formed block with provision of reducible iron bearing material e.g. iron oxide material such as iron ores block and with the use of reducing material block . Optionally one or more additives block may be additionally mixed with the reducible iron bearing material and the reducing material as described herein with regard to other embodiments e.g. lime soda ash fluorspar etc. . Water is then added block in the formation of the micro agglomerates. For example in one embodiment a mixer e.g. like that of a commercial kitchen stand mixer may be used to mix all the components until they are formed into small micro agglomerate structures.

Direct feeding of fine dried particles such as taconite concentrates and pulverized coal in gas fired furnaces would result in a large quantity of the particles being blown out as dust by the movement of furnace gases. Therefore micro agglomeration of the feed mixture is desirable. For example direct mixing of wet filter cakes of taconite concentrates and dry ground coal with optimum addition of water can generate micro agglomerates by a suitable mixing technique such as Pekay mixers paddle mixers or ribbon mixers. Typical size distributions of micro agglomerates as a function of different levels of moisture are shown in .

Feeding of micro agglomerates to hearth surfaces has several advantages. Micro agglomerates can be fed to hearth surfaces without breakage with minimal dust losses and with uniform spreading over hearth surfaces. Then micro agglomerates once placed on the hearth may be compacted into mound shaped structures as described herein e.g. pyramidal shapes rounded mounds dome shaped structures etc. 

The table of shows the terminal velocities of micro agglomerates as functions of size and air velocity calculated by assuming that the apparent density of micro agglomerates is 2.8 and air temperature is 1371 C. 2500 F. . Particle sizes with terminal velocities less than air velocities would be blown out as dust in gas fired furnaces. To prevent dust losses in at least one embodiment it is desirable to have at least 50 of the layer of reducible micro agglomerates include micro agglomerates having a average size of about 2 millimeters or less. Referring to it is noted that in such a case the micro agglomerates should be formed with about 12 moisture to achieve such a distribution of micro agglomerates.

The moisture content to provide desired properties for the micro agglomerates will depend on various factors. For example the moisture content of the micro agglomerates will depend at least on the fineness or coarseness and water absorption behavior of the feed mixture. Depending on such fineness of the feed mixture the moisture content may be within a range of about 10 percent to about 20 percent.

Any type of layering of the micro agglomerate may be used. For example the reducible micro agglomerates may be provided by providing a first layer of reducible micro agglomerates on the hearth material layer. Subsequently one or more additional layers of reducible micro agglomerates may be provided on a first layer. The average size of the reducible micro agglomerates of at least one of the provided additional layers could be different relative to the size of the micro agglomerates previously provided. For example the size may be larger or smaller than the previously provided layers. In one embodiment feeding of micro agglomerates in layers with coarser agglomerates at the bottom and with decreasing size to the top may minimize the mixing of iron ore coal mixtures with the underlying heath material layer e.g. pulverized coke layer thereby minimizing the generation of micro nuggets.

The use of reducible feed mixture layers having different stoichiometric amounts of reducing material may be advantageously used in combination with the use of micro agglomerates as described herein. e.g. the stoichiometric percentage increasing as one moves away from the hearth layer . For example larger size micro agglomerates e.g. coarser agglomerates along with lower stoichiometric percentages of reducing material may be used for material adjacent the hearth layer. Additional layers having higher stoichiometric percentages and micro agglomerates of decreasing size e.g. finer agglomerates may then be provided to the coarser and lower percentage micro agglomerates provided on the hearth layer.

All patents patent documents and references cited herein are incorporated in their entirety as if each were incorporated separately. This invention has been described with reference to illustrative embodiments and is not meant to be construed in a limiting sense. As described previously one skilled in the art will recognize that other various illustrative applications may use the techniques as described herein to take advantage of the beneficial characteristics of the particles generated hereby. Various modifications of the illustrative embodiments as well as additional embodiments to the invention will be apparent to persons skilled in the art upon reference to this description.

