---

title: Method and apparatus for spreadsheet automation
abstract: A method and apparatus for spreadsheet automation have been disclosed.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=09323735&OS=09323735&RS=09323735
owner: A3 SOLUTIONS INC.
number: 09323735
owner_city: San Francisco
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050606
---
This patent application claims priority of U.S. Application Ser. No. 60 578 136 filed on Jun. 8 2004 entitled Method and Apparatus for Spreadsheet Automation which is by the same inventors as this application and which is hereby incorporated herein by reference.

The present invention pertains to spreadsheets. More particularly the present invention relates to a method and apparatus for spreadsheet automation.

Spreadsheets are ubiquitous. They are used by individuals as well as the largest organizations. Spreadsheets originally designed as personal productivity tools have become the application of choice for a wide variety of enterprise department and team processes. Spreadsheets are used throughout enterprises both large and small for mission critical forecasting budgeting reporting analysis etc. They are easy to create easy to modify and easy to use however there are possible problems.

For example consider this scenario A budget administrator is burdened with bringing together diverse inputs and models from all over the enterprise. Getting the relevant operational data from spreadsheets from manufacturing sales and marketing into the plan along with expense information from all of the cost center managers is an overwhelming task. Add to this the possibility that the capital plan and the compensation plan may both cross all these functions. This may result in budget administrators spending excessive hours completing this task fraught with possible errors and not having enough time for analysis. This presents a problem.

The natural temptation is to blame the spreadsheets for creating this situation however the alternative is generally replacing spreadsheets with a pre packaged application lacking the ability of the spreadsheets in modeling your business. Furthermore your models processes and expertise may be built around spreadsheets. The bottom line is that the loss of visibility the cost of re engineering business rules and processes and re training people is expensive. This presents a problem.

Spreadsheets for example Microsoft Excel were designed for personal productivity and this may lead to problems when being used by workgroups. It may be easy to merge for example a sales forecast when a spreadsheet is used by three sales managers. However when as few as 5 users try to consolidate their information it can be both cumbersome and trouble prone. For example one approach involves emailing spreadsheet workbooks to individuals then having those workbooks filled out and emailed back which necessitates manually replacing the original worksheets. Because these operations involve file management email based communication repetitive manual reporting analysis and reconciliation it may be difficult and time consuming for a process administrator to keep track of who has what version of a file and to ensure that all changes have been correctly merged. This presents a problem.

Another complaint leveled against the corporate use of spreadsheets is the proliferation of spreadmarts spreadsheet datamart that is many individual spreadsheets that contain different snapshots of corporate data. The problem is that while one person s snapshot may be of for example the January forecast another s may be the January budget plus actuals to date. When people try to do analysis based on different snapshots they have a problem.

When spreadsheet processes become enterprise processes the administrative burden may become untenable with costs inaccuracy and inefficiencies escalating. The integrity of the processes may be at stake. This presents a problem.

Additionally traditional spreadsheets are not web enabled which is a benefit in today s connected world. This presents a problem.

Spreadsheet automation is a framework for building efficient spreadsheet processes while capitalizing on the models analytics and expertise that already exist in a user s current spreadsheets. Spreadsheet automation may lead to results of high value and easy to deploy solutions at low total cost especially when compared to traditional enterprise applications. In one embodiment of the invention spreadsheet automation provides efficiency via fast accurate and automated distribution of data collection of data consolidation of data reporting and analysis. This may lead to higher integrity productivity communications and better visibility into business issues through real time analysis.

In one embodiment of the invention a spreadsheet automation approach wraps a spreadsheet environment such as Excel in a shell that handles enterprise level issues such as deployment authentication process control and database connectivity.

In one embodiment of the invention instead of using email as a distribution mechanism the spreadsheet automation which is built as a web application delivers spreadsheets from a central server directly to a user s desktop.

In one embodiment of the invention a user can retrieve a spreadsheet also called a spreadsheet model a template or a template model fill out the spreadsheet and submit the changes to the server with the changes just made automatically available to everyone. And the data the spreadsheet uses is automatically refreshed when a new spreadsheet is requested from the server. This provides for an up to date spreadsheet.

In one embodiment of the invention content posted to a spreadsheet automation server requires only basic word processing skills and the messaging interface allows the process administrator to customize the messaging for different groups of users.

In one embodiment of the invention the spreadsheet automation server is built around the concept of automating spreadsheets so that enterprise spreadsheet applications can be built by end users. This allows a company or workgroup to leverage its existing spreadsheet assets and spreadsheet skill set and business domain knowledge to build enterprise class applications.

In one embodiment of the invention the spreadsheet automation server is a web based application. In one embodiment of the invention the spreadsheet automation server functions are on an application server foundation and is built as a set of J2EE Java 2 Platform Enterprise Edition and or .NET components. Thus it leverages well established IT Information Technology infrastructure found in today s corporations and integrates easily with some of the most popular application infrastructures for example Tomcat BEA WebLogic Microsoft Windows Server Microsoft Internet Information Server Microsoft IIS and IBM Websphere .

In one embodiment of the invention direct support for OLAP Online Analytical Processing databases including for example Microsoft SQL Server Analysis Services and Hyperion Essbase as well as relational databases is provided.

In one embodiment of the invention the spreadsheet model is centrally maintained and deployed and models are delivered through the http protocol. This allows application administrators to centrally control and update each model s analytics including for example conditional rules formatting missing items suppressed dynamic calculations etc. while allowing tailored and personalized models to be delivered to each user.

One embodiment of the invention has the following components a spreadsheet automation server a portal and an optional spreadsheet add in also called a player . The spreadsheet automation server may have various embodiments for example one tailored to the use of the web is called a Web Spreadsheet Server WSS . The spreadsheet automation server is composed of an application server and Java J2EE and or .NET components that aid in the construction of spreadsheet based analytic applications. These components can parse XLS Excel spreadsheet templates and dynamically fill them with data according to the business rules incorporated into the templates. They render the populated XLS models into either real time XLS files delivered directly to Excel or to HTML web pages. The portal may serve as the web based interface to the spreadsheet automation server. It allows users to select applications to choose the model parameters to display and to dynamically generate these applications. The spreadsheet add in is for users who require advanced spreadsheet functionality and establishes a direct connection between for example Excel and the spreadsheet automation server. The spreadsheet add in is delivered to the user s machine via the portal. Download of the spreadsheet add in may be automatic and thus would require no administrative access and therefore no IT support to the desktop.

In one embodiment of the invention the portal includes an area for announcements for related links and discussion boards.

In one embodiment of the invention the spreadsheet automation server has pre built modules such as capital modeling and compensation modeling.

The portal has in this embodiment a variety of functions that may be accessed by users. For example model access workflow an executive dashboard an ad hoc slice and dice communications and administration .

The spreadsheet engine has in this embodiment security services a modeling engine and an object repository .

Spreadsheet automation works with one or more spreadsheets and leverages the existing spreadsheet assets keeps the spreadsheet experience and adds enterprise class features. It is adaptable because as the spreadsheets change the models and enterprise class features allow these to be used by all users. Since the changes may be implemented gradually this may lead to better adaptability lowered costs decreased errors and increased return on investment etc.

The invention in one embodiment constructs XLS Excel spreadsheet models on demand in a web environment. This involves deconstruction and reconstruction use of spreadsheet specification and a web spreadsheet engine.

In one embodiment of the invention support is provided for communication with heterogeneous data sources. In one embodiment a reusable catalog of objects such as business and application objects is an available resource. In one embodiment of the invention integrated views and models are possible as are complex derived information.

Referring back to the Data Sources for the description above were a given data source so as to make the description clear. These data sources and the data that goes with them for example the regions and the associated data such as the sales costs shipping data taxes etc. from each region must somehow be constructed. In one embodiment of the invention referring back to a group of original spreadsheets at are input into the system and their structure and data is deconstructed into objects at . For example in at mention was made of 135 Regions. Thus for example the system may have received 135 different spreadsheets from users in 135 different regions. The spreadsheets were each deconstructed to provide available objects for later reconstruction into real time models based on a user s spreadsheet specification such as illustrated in .

What is to be appreciated is that multiple spreadsheets from a variety of sources containing differing fields may be deconstructed their data made available and then reconstructed into real time spreadsheet models. One of skill in the art will appreciate that this technique allows for the use of existing spreadsheets as well as up to date data.

One of skill in the art will appreciate that by using a spreadsheet language tokens ranges and spreadsheet contents etc. and coupled with corporate metadata it is possible to make available dynamically spreadsheet models that may otherwise be delivered as static spreadsheets. Web enabling this spreadsheet automation allows for organizational controls tracking security etc. otherwise not possible in spreadsheet applications. Additionally the architecture for the spreadsheet may be on a server and or a client. These capabilities coupled with the ability to reuse objects provides an extensible environment for spreadsheet automation.

Referring back to illustrates a network environment in which the techniques described may be applied. The network environment has a network that connects S servers through S and C clients through C. As shown several computer systems in the form of S servers through S and C clients through C are connected to each other via a network which may be for example a corporate based network. Note that alternatively the network might be or include one or more of the Internet a Local Area Network LAN Wide Area Network WAN satellite link fiber network cable network or a combination of these and or others. The servers may represent for example disk storage systems alone or storage and computing resources. Likewise the clients may have computing storage and viewing capabilities. The method and apparatus described herein may be applied to essentially any type of communicating means or device whether local or remote such as a LAN a WAN a system bus etc. Thus the invention may find application at both the S servers through S and C clients through C.

Referring back to illustrates a computer system in block diagram form which may be representative of any of the clients and or servers shown in . The block diagram is a high level conceptual representation and may be implemented in a variety of ways and by various architectures. Bus system interconnects a Central Processing Unit CPU Read Only Memory ROM Random Access Memory RAM storage display audio keyboard pointer miscellaneous input output I O devices and communications . The bus system may be for example one or more of such buses as a system bus Peripheral Component Interconnect PCI Advanced Graphics Port AGP Small Computer System Interface SCSI Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE standard number FireWire Universal Serial Bus USB etc. The CPU may be a single multiple or even a distributed computing resource. Storage may be Compact Disc CD Digital Versatile Disk DVD hard disks HD optical disks tape flash memory sticks video recorders etc. Display might be for example an embodiment of the present invention. Note that depending upon the actual implementation of a computer system the computer system may include some all more or a rearrangement of components in the block diagram. For example a thin client might consist of a wireless hand held device that lacks for example a traditional keyboard. Thus many variations on the system of are possible.

For purposes of discussing and understanding the invention it is to be understood that various terms are used by those knowledgeable in the art to describe techniques and approaches. Furthermore in the description for purposes of explanation numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. It will be evident however to one of ordinary skill in the art that the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In some instances well known structures and devices are shown in block diagram form rather than in detail in order to avoid obscuring the present invention. These embodiments are described in sufficient detail to enable those of ordinary skill in the art to practice the invention and it is to be understood that other embodiments may be utilized and that logical mechanical electrical and other changes may be made without departing from the scope of the present invention.

Some portions of the description may be presented in terms of algorithms and symbolic representations of operations on for example data bits within a computer memory. These algorithmic descriptions and representations are the means used by those of ordinary skill in the data processing arts to most effectively convey the substance of their work to others of ordinary skill in the art. An algorithm is here and generally conceived to be a self consistent sequence of acts leading to a desired result. The acts are those requiring physical manipulations of physical quantities. Usually though not necessarily these quantities take the form of electrical or magnetic signals capable of being stored transferred combined compared and otherwise manipulated. It has proven convenient at times principally for reasons of common usage to refer to these signals as bits values elements symbols characters terms numbers or the like.

It should be borne in mind however that all of these and similar terms are to be associated with the appropriate physical quantities and are merely convenient labels applied to these quantities. Unless specifically stated otherwise as apparent from the discussion it is appreciated that throughout the description discussions utilizing terms such as processing or computing or calculating or determining or displaying or the like can refer to the action and processes of a computer system or similar electronic computing device that manipulates and transforms data represented as physical electronic quantities within the computer system s registers and memories into other data similarly represented as physical quantities within the computer system memories or registers or other such information storage transmission or display devices.

An apparatus for performing the operations herein can implement the present invention. This apparatus may be specially constructed for the required purposes or it may comprise a general purpose computer selectively activated or reconfigured by a computer program stored in the computer. Such a computer program may be stored in a computer readable storage medium such as but not limited to any type of disk including floppy disks hard disks optical disks compact disk read only memories CD ROMs and magnetic optical disks read only memories ROMs random access memories RAMs electrically programmable read only memories EPROM s electrically erasable programmable read only memories EEPROMs FLASH memories magnetic or optical cards etc. or any type of media suitable for storing electronic instructions either local to the computer or remote to the computer.

The algorithms and displays presented herein are not inherently related to any particular computer or other apparatus. Various general purpose systems may be used with programs in accordance with the teachings herein or it may prove convenient to construct more specialized apparatus to perform the required method. For example any of the methods according to the present invention can be implemented in hard wired circuitry by programming a general purpose processor or by any combination of hardware and software. One of ordinary skill in the art will immediately appreciate that the invention can be practiced with computer system configurations other than those described including hand held devices multiprocessor systems microprocessor based or programmable consumer electronics digital signal processing DSP devices set top boxes network PCs minicomputers mainframe computers and the like. The invention can also be practiced in distributed computing environments where tasks are performed by remote processing devices that are linked through a communications network.

The methods of the invention may be implemented using computer software. If written in a programming language conforming to a recognized standard sequences of instructions designed to implement the methods can be compiled for execution on a variety of hardware platforms and for interface to a variety of operating systems. In addition the present invention is not described with reference to any particular programming language. It will be appreciated that a variety of programming languages may be used to implement the teachings of the invention as described herein. Furthermore it is common in the art to speak of software in one form or another e.g. program procedure application driver . . . as taking an action or causing a result. Such expressions are merely a shorthand way of saying that execution of the software by a computer causes the processor of the computer to perform an action or produce a result.

It is to be understood that various terms and techniques are used by those knowledgeable in the art to describe communications protocols applications implementations mechanisms etc. One such technique is the description of an implementation of a technique in terms of an algorithm or mathematical expression. That is while the technique may be for example implemented as executing code on a computer the expression of that technique may be more aptly and succinctly conveyed and communicated as a formula algorithm or mathematical expression. Thus one of ordinary skill in the art would recognize a block denoting A B C as an additive function whose implementation in hardware and or software would take two inputs A and B and produce a summation output C . Thus the use of formula algorithm or mathematical expression as descriptions is to be understood as having a physical embodiment in at least hardware and or software such as a computer system in which the techniques of the present invention may be practiced as well as implemented as an embodiment .

A machine readable medium is understood to include any mechanism for storing or transmitting information in a form readable by a machine e.g. a computer . For example a machine readable medium includes read only memory ROM random access memory RAM magnetic disk storage media optical storage media flash memory devices electrical optical acoustical or other form of propagated signals e.g. carrier waves infrared signals digital signals etc. etc.

As used in this description one embodiment or an embodiment or similar phrases means that the feature s being described are included in at least one embodiment of the invention. References to one embodiment in this description do not necessarily refer to the same embodiment however neither are such embodiments mutually exclusive. Nor does one embodiment imply that there is but a single embodiment of the invention. For example a feature structure act etc. described in one embodiment may also be included in other embodiments. Thus the invention may include a variety of combinations and or integrations of the embodiments described herein.

As used in this description Excel which is a Microsoft spreadsheet product is not intended to limit the invention. Rather Excel is a very common spreadsheet and any such reference to Excel is to be understood to refer to any class of spreadsheet products.

As used in this description spreadsheet specification or spreadsheet model specification or model specification all refer to the same entity that is a specification that defines a spreadsheet. As used in this description spreadsheet or spreadsheet model or model or template or similar terms all refer to a spreadsheet which a user may use. For example in at is a portal model access. This model is to a spreadsheet and not to the spreadsheet specification which may have been used to construct it .

