---

title: Method and user interface for downloading audio and video content filters to a media player
abstract: A client server arrangement for downloading media content filters from a server device to a client device. The media content filters define portions of a separate audio visual presentation containing potentially objectionable subject matter. Depending on user selections, identified portions of the audio/visual presentation may be skipped and/or muted during play. In one particular implementation, the client device, e.g., a DVD player, is configured to initiate a connection with a server device. Upon successful connection, the server device transmits one or more media content filters to the client device. The client device may be configured to determine whether a particular media content filter is available, to facilitate deletion of some existing media content filters in order to secure adequate memory space, and to ensure that the media player has an active account, before initiating a connection with the server device. The server device may be configured to determine whether the media player is associated with an active user account, whether a requested filter is available, and whether adequate memory space is available at the media player, before transmitting media content filters to the client device.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07975021&OS=07975021&RS=07975021
owner: Clearplay, Inc.
number: 07975021
owner_city: Salt Lake City
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051020
---
The present application is a non provisional application claiming priority to pending provisional application No. 60 620 902 titled Method and User Interface for Downloading Audio and Video Content Filters to a Media Player filed on Oct. 20 2004 which is hereby incorporated by reference herein. The present application also claims priority to and is a continuation in part of U.S. application Ser. No. 11 104 924 filed Apr. 12 2005 which claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 561 851 filed on Apr. 12 2004 and also claims priority to and is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 694 873 filed on Oct. 23 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 898 799 and claims priority to and is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 695 102 filed on Oct. 23 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 889 383.

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 694 873 entitled Multimedia Content Navigation and Playback filed Oct. 23 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 898 799 which issued May 24 2005 

U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 695 102 entitled Delivery of Navigation Data for Playback of Audio and Video Content filed Oct. 23 2000 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 889 383 which issued May 3 2005 and

Each of the above referenced related applications and patents are hereby incorporated by reference herein.

Aspects of the invention relate generally to the use of content filters for filtered playback of multimedia content such as movies or other audio video content playable on a digital video disk or digital versatile disk DVD player or similar media player. More specifically the invention relates to downloading multimedia content filters to a client device such as a media player from a server device by way of some communication medium such as a dialup connection network connection internet etc.

Technology currently exists which allows the user of a DVD player to filter objectionable content of a DVD resident audio or video presentation such as a motion picture during playback on the player. This technology allows for example the viewing of a movie originally containing more adult oriented content by younger less mature viewers. Generally the filtering function is provided by a media content filter resident within the DVD player that specifically applies to a particular audio or video presentation such as a movie. The filter which is typically stored within a nonvolatile logic memory such as flash memory indicates which portions of the audio or video presentation are to be skipped or which audio portions are to be muted by the DVD player during playback. Typically whether the filter is employed for a particular playback of the presentation may be determined by the user by way of a menu selection system provided by the DVD player. Further different forms of objectionable content such as profane language sexually explicit content and so on may also be selectively filtered by way of the menu system. In some systems the filtering system may be protected by way of a user defined password so that those not privy to the password are unable to defeat the filtering mechanism.

Each filter specific to a particular presentation is typically produced at some point after a DVD of the presentation has been released. Thus while some filters for preexisting movies may be pre installed in the DVD player the player normally also includes a method of accepting and storing new filters as they are produced. Typically filters are installed by way of a CD DVD or other disc readable by the DVD player. Therefore a user inserts the disc containing the filters of interest into the tray or slot normally employed for playback. The DVD player recognizing the disc as one containing filters installs the filters from the disc possibly at the guidance of the user by way of the player menu system.

While filter delivery and installation via a disc is convenient additional methods of installing the content filters in a DVD player that do not require the shipment of a disc from a filter provider to the user or consumer may be advantageous.

Generally embodiments of the present invention provide a method and associated user interface for downloading audio and or video content filters to a DVD player or similar media player over a data communication medium.

One particular configuration of the present invention is a method for downloading at least one media content filter from a remote storage. The configuration comprises establishing communication with the remote storage requesting the at least one media content filter receiving the at least one media content filter from the remote storage and locally storing the at least one media content filter in a local storage.

Another particular configuration of the present invention is a method for transmitting at least one media content filter from a remote storage to a local storage of a media player the method comprises establishing a connection with the media player receiving an identification of the at least one media content filter requested from the media player determining whether the at least one media content filter is available and transmitting the at least one media content filter to the media player.

Embodiments and advantages of the invention will be realized by those skilled in the art upon reading the detailed description of the invention presented below.

The client computing platform includes media filtering capability of some sort. Additionally the storage of the server includes corresponding media filter files. Generally the media filtering capability employs the media filtering files in order to alter play of a multimedia presentation according to user selections. In some particular arrangements the media filtering capability and media filter files are those described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 898 799 and 6 889 383 and U.S. application Ser. No. 11 104 924 referenced and incorporated above. In these particular arrangements media filter files are provided for various movie titles available on some form of memory suitable for storing video and or audio such as DVD. The media filter files define portions of a movie that are associated with various types of scenes and language potentially unsuitable for certain audiences such as portions of a movie with graphic violence gory violence sexually explicit behavior explicit drug use etc. A user may elect to have certain types of scenes skipped or muted. The media filtering capability monitors play of the movie and scenes identified in the filter file. When the media filtering capability identifies an elected type of scene it operates to perform a skip of the scene or to mute the audio associated with the scene.

Referring to the process of loading a filter not currently residing in the media player is initiated by the player recognizing that a removable memory e.g. DVD with media content that has no corresponding filter has been loaded in the player operation . For ease of discussion the remainder of this application will typically refer to media content in terms of one particular type of media content i.e. a motion picture movie provided on DVD. A movie however is only one particular form of media content that may be associated with embodiments conforming to the present invention. Any other forms of media content and multimedia content may also be applicable to embodiments conforming to the present invention. Once the media player determines the identity of the movie and the lack of a filter for that movie the media player provides an on screen menu which allows the user to obtain a filter for the movie. If filter updates by way of removable memory media are not supported in the player the initial menu provided is that shown in the menu of . Alternatively if filter updates via removable memory media are supported in addition to those provided by way of a client server arrangement the menu of is presented to the user. One particular media player configured to receive media content filters from alternative storage mediums is described in U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 641 678 titled Video Player Configured to Receive Playback Filters From Alternative Storage Mediums which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.

Whether or not filter updates via CD or DVD are allowed the user is provided in the menus of and with a set of three on screen buttons which allow the user to either obtain more information about the filter begin the process of loading the filter into the DVD player or play the loaded disc without filtering the content. When the user selects the Normal Play option the media player will play the loaded DVD without the benefit of any filters thus allowing the DVD to play without any skipping of the video and audio signals or muting of the audio signal. As an aid to the user the on screen menu will display the function of the Normal Play button when highlighted by way of the arrow keys as shown in the menu of . In an alternative embodiment the player may prevent playback of the disc altogether by way of password protection. In either case no filter associated with that disc will be loaded and non filtered play will begin.

The user may choose to obtain a filter by way of the Filtered Play menu option shown in the menus of . If use of a CD DVD or some other form of removable memory for loading of filters is supported selection of the Filtered Play button in the menu of displays the menu of . The menu provides the user with a choice of either downloading the corresponding filter over a phone connection via the Download button or allowing loading of the filter by way of a disc via the Insert Disc button as indicated operation . Selection of the Insert Disc button then causes the DVD to prompt the user to load the disc containing the filter of interest operation unless the insufficient memory is available in the DVD player to allowing loading of the filter. Lack of filter memory is addressed and described in greater detail below.

If the Download button of the menu is selected or in the case that loading a filter via DVD or CD is not a supported option several status checks typically are executed by the media player to determine if downloading the filter is possible. For example the player first determines if the player is currently deactivated operation . Deactivation of the player typically denoted within the player by way of a stored deactivation code or setting a flag indicates that the user has never activated the player to take advantage of media content filters has discontinued his account with the filter provider has allowed his account to lapse e.g. by not paying a monthly subscription fee or for some other reason the player is not currently in an active state i.e. ready to accept new filters. If the player is deactivated the DVD player provides the menu of instructing the user to contact the filter provider to activate or reactivate his account thus providing the user with renewed access to a variety of media content filters operation . Access to the filter provider may be provided by way of phone e mail web site or other means. This menu also provides a location whereby the user can insert a code supplied by the filter provider to reactivate the player operation thus enabling subsequent installation of filters. Otherwise filter installation will not be possible and the user may then elect to play the disc in Normal Play mode operation as described above.

In one embodiment of the invention the initial activation of a media player after purchase may be implemented by way of a single code that may activate all media players equipped to install media content filters from the filter provider. Such a code may even be published on a website or included with the documentation supplied with the player. On the other hand a first reactivation such as after a user account was terminated would be implemented by way of a second more private code specifically employable for that media player. Further reactivations if allowed would each likely require separate reactivation codes as well.

Upon reactivation of an inactive account operation or verification of the active status of the player operation the media player determines whether the movie is scheduled to have a filter file. In one example the player checks a Master Index residing within the player to determine if the content on the currently loaded disc will ever have a corresponding filter operation of . Generally the Master Index provides a list of films for which media content filters are currently available. A current Master Index is downloaded to player memory whenever the player connects to the server. The Master Index may also be updated replaced with most recent version when a filter disc or other removable memory is in communication with the player. In addition a list of movies for which a filter will never be generated is also supplied. Many movies and similar presentations do not realistically contain any objectively objectionable content. For example many G rated General Audience children s movies do not contain any sexual violent or profane material that warrant being skipped or muted by a media content filter. If no filter will even be produced for the disc in question the menu of or a similar menu is provided indicating that no filter is available. The menu also allows the user to select the Normal Play option to play the disc without a filter operation .

If the disc content is the potential target of a filter the media player checks the Master Index to determine if such a filter is available for download operation . If the Master Index indicates that the filter is not available the player then determines whether the Master Index has been updated recently from the filter provider operation . Updating of the Master Index may be considered recent if it has occurred for example within the last twelve hours. In other embodiments an update may be considered recent only if it has occurred within the last few minutes or hours or within the last few days or weeks. If the information in the Master Index is considered up to date the media player presents the menu of or a similar menu to indicate that a filter is not available operation and to allow the user to play the DVD without content filtering operation . If the Master Index is current and the filter was not available in operation then the player assumes the filter is not available. This determination is made without connecting to the server which optimizes efficiency and cost concerns by not connecting when it is not necessary.

If the Master Index indicates that a filter associated with the loaded disc is available or if the Master Index has not been updated recently the DVD player may additionally check if there is any available memory for an additional filter operation . Determinations of sufficient memory is identified at several times in the methods described herein. It is possible to eliminate or rearrange the time of these determinations or eliminate the determinations altogether. A method for deleting filters in order to provide sufficient memory for a new filter is described in detail below. At the time of determining whether there is sufficient memory in the local storage for additional filters the player or server may further determine whether the particular filter for the movie has been recently deleted from the player or whether it has been deleted repeatedly. In such instances the player may prohibit a connection with the server or the server may prohibit downloading of the filter. Such prohibition may be necessary at times to prohibit frequent unnecessary connections to the server or other system abuse.

Assuming available memory space for a filter the media player then provides the menu of to alert the user to prepare a communication medium such as a phone line network connection cable DSL line wireless port Cellular satellite line of sight devices microwave radio transmissions etc. for use by the media player to enable receipt of the filter. In other words with reference to the particular example of a dialup connection a currently unused phone line should be connected to the media player if one has not already been provided. After a communication medium is prepared the user is directed to select the Get Filter button of the menu of to allow communication with the server typically a computer of the filter provider. In alternative embodiments connection to the filter provider server may occur by way of wireless connection Ethernet or other connection means.

In another embodiment the filter provider server may actually be a computer not located at the site of the filter provider. For example the server may actually be a computer located in the home of the user or is on a network accessible by the user wherein the computer has downloaded the files from the filter provider or another source. In that case the media player may connect to the home computer containing the filters by any means including phone connection Internet Universal Serial Bus USB or wireless for example infrared connection. Alternatively the client may be a computer separate from the media player. Filter files are downloaded to memory of the client and then transferred to the media player memory. The transfer may occur over a communication medium or the filters may be stored to a removable memory media and physically transported to the media player.

Once the user presses the Get Filter button the media player client checks an internal memory location to determine the type of account the user maintains with the filter provider server . Such information is typically loaded into the media player the first time the media player connects to the filter provider server. As a result if the next connection will be the initial connection the player may assume a particular type of account prior to downloading the actual account information from the filter provider server. If the user possesses a single filter account which allows the user to purchase single filters one at a time from the filter provider the media player displays the menu of which inquires whether the user wishes to purchase the filter associated with the loaded disc operation . In an alternative embodiment the menu may display the cost of the filter e.g. 1.00 to the user depending upon whether the cost of the filter is reflected in the Master Index. In addition if the Master Index does not indicate a cost for that specific filter the menu of displays the cost an estimated cost or a range of costs for that filter. The user may then decline to purchase the filter Cancel selected in which case the player displays the menu of as described above to allow the user to play the disc without a filter operation .

Alternatively the user may instead elect to purchase the single filter by selecting the Purchase button of in which case the player presents the menu of or may elect to purchase by selecting the Cancel button as shown in . The menu includes an input window or window where the user may enter a password to allow the purchase to take place operation . The user may also be prompted to enter a user name account name or the like. If the user enters a valid password the player may then establish a connection with the filter provider server.

Returning to the menu of if the user instead maintains a subscriber type of account with the filter provider an inquiry to the user to purchase the filter is not required and the password entry window of is presented to allow connection of the player to the filter provider operation .

Prior to connecting with the filter provider the media player may optionally check whether enough memory space is available to store new filters operation . The player may further make the determination based on the type of account. More specifically if the user has a single filter account memory space for only a single filter is required. However if a subscriber account is involved several filters may be downloaded during any given connection with the server. For example if the user subscription allows fifteen filters to be downloaded per connection space for fifteen additional filters should be available. In either case if enough space is currently available in the internal memory of the media player the connection process ensues as described below .

If instead available player memory space is lacking existing filters have to be deleted in order to have sufficient space for new filters. In one particular implementation the player displays the menu of . The menu provides an alphabetical organization of the filters currently loaded in the media player operation along with an indication of the amount or percentage of memory storage currently filled. The user may then select any particular filters for deletion thereby freeing additional space in the memory of the player for the new filters operation . The player may require a deletion of a number of filters corresponding with the number of filters that will be downloaded. For example if the user maintains a subscription allowing for 15 filters per download then the player will require deletion of 15 filter files before downloading. Additionally or alternatively the player may provide the menus of which notify the user of a number of filters that are the oldest least used or both currently residing within the player. The number of filters selected may further correspond to the number of filters previously identified by the player that may be downloaded from the filter provider depending on the type of account maintained by the user. By way of the DVD player arrow keys or similar input means the user may peruse the list of filters selected by the player for deletion as shown in the menus of . The user then has the option to keep by way of the Cancel button or delete via the Delete button the selected filters.

If the media player then determines that enough space is available for the expected number of filters to be downloaded operation the media player may begin initiating a connection with the filter provider operation . The nature of the actual connection may take on any number of forms. In one particular example the connection with the filter provider may be a simple modulator demodulator modem dialup connection for which only the phone number of the filter provider providing dialup access to the filters is required. The user may also have to enter a user name and password. Alternatively the player may automatically transmit the user name and password when a connection to the server is established. The phone number may be preprogrammed in the media player by the player manufacturer or may be a number provided to the user by the filter provider. In the latter situation the media player would provide the menu of or a similar menu by which the user could input the dialup number by way of numeric keys of the front panel or remote control device of the player.

Alternatively or in addition to a direct dialup connection the media player may allow the user to employ his own Internet service provider ISP to connect with the filter provider via the Internet. In that case the media player may allow an option to preload into the media player information required to initiate an Internet connection. For example the menu of allows the user to enter his ISP information by pressing the right arrow key. The media player then leads the user through a series of menus to enter the phone number user name and password of the user s ISP account. Such information may be entered by way of numeric keys as described above or via a alphanumeric array displayed on one of the menus . Each individual character of the array may then be selected and entered by way of the normal arrow and select keys of the front panel or remote control of the player.

In other embodiments the media player may receive the ISP information and similar data via another method than remote control. For example the user may store the information on a transferable medium such as a CD a memory stick or the like by way of a computer or similar device having a suitable human interface input device such as a keyboard and then transfer that information to the media player for example by way of the DVD reader of the DVD player a memory stick interface or other interface of the media player that receives the memory medium. In an alternative embodiment the ISP connection information or similar data may be generated on a computer and sent by way of the Internet directly to the media player by its own Internet connection. In either case the ISP information or other data normally transferable from the user to the player by way of remote control or other standard means would be stored in the player more quickly and efficiently.

After the ISP information is entered the player may then test the connection using the entered information while displaying the menu of which relates the progress of the test. This progress may be shown by indicating when dialing is occurring when the user name and password are being transferred and the like. If the test of the ISP connection is successful the media player then displays the menu of or a similar menu indicating this fact. If the test is unsuccessful a menu such as the menu of may be shown indicating that the test was not successful possibly along with an indication of the source of the error such as an incorrect phone number user name or password.

The dialup number or ISP information discussed above may be provided at any point prior to the media player attempting to establish a connection with the filter provider. For example the user may program the information into the media player before a disc is inserted into the player for viewing.

Presuming the required connection information has been loaded into the media player a connection to obtain a filter may commence operation . The media player dials the programmed phone number to establish the connection. While the connection is being attempted the player presents the menu of indicating so. If the connection fails the media player communicates this fact to the user via the menu of possibly with some indication as to the cause of the failure.

Generally as described below the operations executed by both the server and the client player while the connection is active are structured such that connection time is reduced thus making the use of the remote connection between player and the server both time and cost efficient. In another embodiment efficiency may not be of prime importance thus allowing a different ordering of operations during the connection.

If the connection to the server of the filter provider is successful the media player then transmits to the server an indication of the identity of the media player usually in the form of the player serial number operation . The server then consults a local database for information concerning the player and account and may transmit some information to the player operation . For example the server may access any information associated with the account identified with the serial number such as the account name which may be transmitted to the media player. Also the account information in the local database may be updated with any pertinent information available to the server at the time such as the time of the current connection. Any customer service messages such as a new customer service phone number or new dialup number may be transmitted to the media player for display via a menu.

The server also determines the status of the player and related account operation . Upon receipt of an account the media player may transmit information regarding the currently requested filter download operation . This information includes the filter ID number associated filter version and expected price of the filter if obtainable within the Master Index residing within the player. If the filter information is not available via the Master Index the player may send some other indication of the identity of the loaded disc in lieu thereof. Also the player may send an indication of the amount of free space available for filters in the memory of the player.

If the server cannot identify an account associated with the received player serial number operation the server may transmit an activation code to the player operation . The player may then display a new account message similar to the menu of described above informing the user as to how the player may be activated operation . If a code is not promptly entered the connection may terminate after some predetermined time operation . The player may also allow the user to play the currently loaded disc without the use of a filter operation . The player will be deactivated when the code has been sent. In one case the activation code is sent and the connection is immediately terminated and the player will display the necessary information for the user to be able to reactivate their player. The user will need to enter this activation code that is usually kept on the server and accessed by a customer service representative. The player will be deactivated when the code has been sent. In one case the activation code is sent and the connection is immediately terminated and the player will display the necessary information for the user to be able to reactivate their player. The user will need to enter this activation code that is usually kept on the server and accessed by a customer service representative.

If the server was able to identify an account in the database with the player serial number but determines that the account is not current deactivated operation the server will transmit a reactivation code to the media player as described above and then subsequently close the connection operation . The media player then provides the user information via the menu of or a similar menu as described above indicating how the user may reactivate the player and account operation . The user may then contact the filter provider as described above to reactivate the account before attempting to obtain more content filters. As before the currently loaded disc may then be played without the benefit of a filter operations . In one particular implementation the server determines whether the user s account is a single or subscription.

Presuming the server has verified the active status of the connected player the server then determines whether the requested filter by way of the filter ID and version previously transferred by the player is available operation . If the filter is not available the server indicates so to the player which informs the user by way of the menu of operation . The message shown may be a dialog sent from the server or generated internally by the media player. The connection is also closed operation . The user may then play the disc without a filter operation .

If the requested filter is available operation the server determines which type of account is involved a single filter account or a subscription account. In one embodiment if the account of the single filter type the server determines the current price of the filter operation . The server may then compare the current price with the expected price if any relayed by the player from the Master Index operation . If the price has changed the server may send a message to be displayed on the menu of indicating that the per filter price has changed and that the new price will be effective on the next download after the transfer of the current filter operation . The server then determines if the filter has already been purchased operation and if so sends a message to be displayed on the menu of indicating that the filter was previously purchased and that the user will not be billed for downloading the filter operation .

Regardless of the type of account involved the server then prepares to transfer the one or more filters to be downloaded to the DVD player operation . More specifically the server places the requested filter and additional filters if a subscription account is involved in a transmission queue for transmission to the player via the connection and initiates the transfer. The server may also send a wait time associated with the requested filter to the player. Generally the wait time indicates the next time the player will be allowed request download of this same filter to prevent multiple attempts to download the filter within a short time span. In one embodiment the wait time may be transferred to the player in the case the filter is not yet available. In that case the wait time may be set such that the player will not request that filter until the next possible time the filter is available for download.

In one particular implementation if the user s account is a subscription then the server will attempt to send extra high use filters in addition to the particular filter associated with the movie as described below before closing the connection. Sending the extra filters optimizes the use of the connection and can help to eliminate the need for establishing later connections.

In addition the server may update the account information update a log indicating the player connected to the server and update a transaction log to reflect the current filters to be purchased and downloaded. This information may be processed immediately or may be batch processed at predetermined intervals such as for example once per hour. Also the server may also send an updated Master Index to be stored in the media player for later access by the user as described above as well as an indication of the filters to be downloaded via the connection to the player.

Once the filters are placed in the queue and the transfer is initiated the media player begins receiving each filter one at a time stores or commits the filter received to the filter storage area of the player and then responds via the connection to the server with an indication that the filter has been committed operation . In another embodiment the media player receives multiple filters in a single burst and commits them before responding to the server. The server then records the identity of the filter that has been committed by the player updates the transmission queue by removing the committed filter and updates the account to indicate the commission of the filter operation .

The server then tracks the number of free memory blocks available in the player by reducing the number of available memory blocks in the player as indicated previously by the player by the amount of memory occupied by the transferred filter committed by the player operation . Further the server sends an indicator such as a flag to determine whether the player has enough free memory blocks in order to continue receiving filters. In response to the continue flag the player checks if sufficient memory remains for another filter and responds to the server with an indication operation .

Next the server determines if there is sufficient memory space to continue operation . If insufficient memory remains for more filters in the queue to be transferred the server indicates an estimated amount of available memory required for a subsequent download of filters. The player then closes the connection and displays a warning to the user by way of the menu of or a similar menu indicating that the filter download could not be completed operation . Furthermore a player may set an internal flag indicating that insufficient memory was available to complete the download. The player may then proceed to check whether the filter requested for the loaded disc has been loaded as described below. Further the player may provide some estimate of the amount of space required to load additional filters operation and may direct the user to the filter deletion operation .

If on the other hand sufficient free memory is available for downloading another filter the player determines if the next filter to be downloaded is already loaded into the player operation . If so the player informs the server which then updates the queue and the account as if the filter had been transmitted to the media player. Otherwise the server again checks if any filters remain in the queue and downloads the next filter to the player operation . Downloading of each filter may effectively encompass operations .

Once the queue is empty operation indicating all filters have been downloaded or if the transfer was interrupted for some reason such as insufficient memory in the player the server may indicate to the player an estimated amount of space that may be required for the next filter or series of filters remaining in the queue to be downloaded operation . The size of the estimated amount of space depends upon for example whether a single filter account or a subscription account is involved. In one embodiment the filter memory within the media player is defined in terms of blocks of some predetermined size. Even if the number of filters to be transmitted is known the indication of the amount of space for the filters to be downloaded remains an estimate as each filter may occupy a different number of blocks in memory. In one embodiment the estimate may be a worst case estimate determined by the largest filter possible or currently available from the filter provider.

At the conclusion of the transfer the player then determines whether the filter associated with the loaded disc has been received operation . If so the connection is closed and an indication that the download is complete is provided by the menu of operation . The loaded disc may then be played employing the content filter. If the filter for the loaded disc has not been downloaded a message via the menu of or a similar menu is presented to the user indicating that the filter for the loaded disc could not be downloaded at this time possibly with an indication as to the source of the problem such as a lack of available memory in the player. In that case the user would have the option of playing the disc without the benefit of the filter.

Throughout the time a connection is maintained between the server and the player the server may track the elapsed time while awaiting a response from the player. In one embodiment if the elapsed time exceeds a predetermined threshold such as for example twenty seconds the server may close the connection with the player.

Disclosed herein are several embodiments of a method and associated user interface for downloading media content filters to a media player or similar device from a filter provider by way of a phone the Internet or other remote connection. While the disclosed embodiments are described in specific terms other embodiments encompassing principles of the invention are also possible. For example while embodiments discuss a phone connection other methods of connecting electronic devices such as by way of wireless networking may also be employed. Also while specific examples of menus presented to the user have been provided many other ways of presenting the same or related information may be employed to the same end. Further while specific examples particularly discuss a DVD player other types of media players capable of displaying movies and similar media presentations may also be utilized within the scope of the invention.

Throughout the application reference is made to the filter storage memory of the media player. While such memory is ordinarily thought of as memory integrated circuits permanently installed on a printed circuit board of the player removable storage media may also be used to store the filters employed by the player. For example memory sticks USB sticks removable flash memory and the like connectable to the an interface of the player accessible by the user may be employed to similar end. As a result a removable storage medium may be coupled with a home computer of the user. The user may then download the filters over the Internet from the filter provider storing those filters into the removable storage medium. The medium could then be removed from the home computer and connected to the media player by way of an interface of the player designed for the medium such as a USB port. The player could then access the filters for use in filtering the content of the DVDs associated with those filters.

Further operations and menus are presented in one particular order. The order however is but one example of the way that operations and menus may be provided. Operations and menus may be rearranged modified or eliminated in any particular implementation while still conforming to aspects of the invention.

