---

title: Structures producing a magnetic field with a gradient and a planar-spherical magnetic field source
abstract: One embodiment provides a planar-spherical magnetic field gradient source structure.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=06995642&OS=06995642&RS=06995642
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Army
number: 06995642
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050728
---
This application is a divisional application of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 644 566 entitled Structures Producing A Magnetic Field With A Gradient which was filed on Aug. 19 2003. A patent based on that Parent application is about to be granted. That Parent application was filed by the inventor herein is currently pending before the U.S. Patent Office and under 35 USC 120 is an application similarly entitled to the benefit of the filing date of the first application. This divisional application is being filed under 35 USC 120 35 USC 121 and 37 CFR 1.53 b and priority from the Aug. 19 2003 effective date of the Parent application Ser. No. 10 644 566 is hereby claimed.

The invention described herein may be manufactured used imported sold and licensed by or for the Government of the United States of America without the payment to me of any royalty thereon.

The present invention relates generally to permanent magnetic field sources and more particularly to magnetic structures that are field gradient sources.

There is a continuing demand for strong magnetic fields of thousands of gauss with large gradients of thousands of gauss per centimeter for mechanical device applications such as activators mechanical bearings and magnetic separators as well as electromagnetic applications including partial beam experiments microwave radiation sources mm wave radiation sources free electron lasers and so on. A major difficulty in magnetic design is the lack of the free electronic charge used in electrical designs. In magnetics every magnetic positive charge e.g. north magnetic pole is always accompanied by an equal and opposite negative charge in the south magnetic pole. Whenever a specific charge distribution is needed to configure a desired magnetic field the negative counterparts of the required charges need to be rendered minimally deleterious to the desired magnetic field. Further prior art techniques for producing a magnetic field gradient such as producing a field taper normal to the direction of the field lines an axial taper in the remanences of the magic cylinders or a longitudinal taper are considered inadequate and ineffective because they are complex expensive and time consuming. Prior art magnetic structures are unable to effectively minimize the deleterious effects of the unwanted counterparts of required charges. Thus there has been a long felt need for simple and inexpensive magnetic field gradient sources that produce a strong volume charge density using layered structures that can cancel unwanted surface charges. This invention s magnetic field gradient source structures can produce the long sought volume charge density in a number of inexpensive and relatively simple layered arrangements that cancel unwanted surface charges without suffering from the disadvantages limitations and shortcomings of prior art magnetic structures.

The magnetic structures of the present invention overcome the shortcomings and limitations of minimizing unwanted negative charges with a layered or laminated arrangement of magnets configured so that the unwanted negative charges are mutually cancelled by other parts of the structure. The field gradient sources of the present invention comprise a series of stacked magnetic laminae that are magnetically oriented perpendicular to their planes in a number of configurations. The magnetic structure of the present invention makes it possible to fulfill the long felt need for a simple and inexpensive way of providing a field gradient source that does not suffer from the disadvantages limitations and shortcomings of complex expensive and time consuming prior art high magnetic field devices. As used herein the terms lamina and laminae are defined as any thin plate sheet or layer.

It is another object of this invention to provide a flat layered magnetic structure as a field gradient source.

It is still another object of this invention to provide a layered magnetic cylinder composed of magnetic laminae that are magnetically oriented perpendicular to their planes as a field gradient source.

It is yet another object of this invention to provide layered magnetic spheres composed of magnetic laminae that are magnetically oriented perpendicular to their planes as field gradient sources.

It is still a further object of this invention to provide methods for providing a field gradient source based on a layered magnetic structure composed of magnetic laminae that are magnetically oriented perpendicular to their planes.

These and other objects and advantages are accomplished with the present invention providing magnetic field structures comprising stacked magnetic laminae that are magnetically oriented perpendicular to their planes and configured so that a volume charge density is provided and the field effects of unwanted surface negative charges are cancelled. These objects and advantages are accomplished by arranging stacked thin magnetic laminae into various configurations where each of the magnetic laminae is thinner than the radius of that particular layer and the magnetic strength M r of each layer will vary linearly with the normal distance r from the stack s center based on the equation where t is the half thickness of the stack. Such an arrangement causes a uniform volume magnetic charge density which results in a magnetic field normal to the laminae of the magnitude M. One important advantage of this invention s stacked magnetic laminae magnetic field structures is to cancel the field effects of the deleterious unwanted surface charges because these surface charges are so situated that their contributions to the internal magnetic field mutually cancel each other and thus they are no longer detrimental to the magnetic field created by the volume charge density. Additionally working spaces to use the internal magnetic field can be made with radial tunnels meridional slots and so forth.

One embodiment of the present invention provides a planar magnetic field gradient source structure. Other embodiments provide a series of nested spherical magnetic shells a layered magnetic cylinder and several layered magnetic spheres. It is also within the contemplation of the present invention to provide methods for generating magnetic field gradient sources based on a layered magnetic structure composed of magnetic laminae that are magnetically oriented perpendicular to their planes. The present invention s advantageous arrangements of stacked circular magnetic laminae fulfills the long felt need for a simple and inexpensive way of providing a field gradient source without suffering from the disadvantages limitations and shortcomings of prior art magnetic structures.

where M t is the magnetization of the stack at t and M M t r t which is formula 1 given above. A quasi uniform volume magnetic charge density is present throughout the entire planar magnetic field gradient source . This volume magnetic charge density is described as quasi uniform because the change in magnetization is not continuous but rather varies abruptly from one lamina to another. However by making the laminae sufficiently thin as compared to thickness t it is possible to approximate uniform density as closely as is necessary.

The magnetic field H r anywhere within one lamina varies according to the following equation 2 24 5 but so that where 4 8 is the magnetic remanence of the magnetic material used and M t is the maximum magnetization in the stack of the planar magnetic field gradient source . The now unpaired negative charges and are found on the two surfaces and cancel each other s effects on the magnetic field as the two surfaces act in opposition with equal strength. By using commercially available material with the greatest Bof about 14 kG and constructing a magnetic structure where t 5 cm. the maximum field would be 14 kG just inside the surface. Numerous variations to the planar magnetic field gradient source are possible such as the volume magnetic charge density varying abruptly from one of the magnetic laminae to another or positioning a tunnel through the planar magnetic field gradient source as a working space and the laminae being disks.

Another embodiment of this invention s magnetic field gradient source is a cylindrical field gradient source composed of nested cylindrical magnetic laminae as depicted in . Referring now to there is depicted a cross sectional side view of a cylindrical field gradient source comprising a plurality of nested cylindrical magnetic laminae arranged around a center along with a surface charge . The magnetic strength M r of each nested cylindrical magnetic laminae varies linearly with the radial distance from the center with the magnetic field intensity measured in Tesla s. Similar to the first embodiment s planar magnetic field gradient source this arrangement gives rise to a volume magnetic charge density .

Having discussed the magnetization gradients in the direction of the magnetization itself one should also consider those cases where magnetization is taken to be the opposite of its gradient. In cases where magnetization is taken to be the opposite of its gradient the magnetic field will be given by the expression In a particle beam application such an arrangement will draw dipolar particles inward to trap them in elliptical paths whereas when the magnetic field and the gradient are aligned the particles will be ejected outward because the dipolar particles tend to align themselves with the magnetic field and are drawn in the direction of an increasing field magnitude.

Referring back to the present invention also encompasses methods of generating a magnetic field gradient . . . variations that apply to the planar cylindrical and spherical magnetic field gradient structures also apply to the methods for generating a magnetic field gradient with planar cylindrical and spherical structures.

It is to be understood that such other features and modifications to the foregoing detailed description are within the contemplation of the invention which is not limited by this description. As will be further appreciated by those skilled in the art any number of configurations as well any number of combinations of circuits differing materials and dimensions can achieve the results described herein. Accordingly the present invention should not be limited by the foregoing description but only by the appended claims.

