---

title: Product recommendations based on collaborative filtering of user data
abstract: A system gathers user behavior data from a group of web retailers and/or non-web retailers, analyzes the user behavior data to identify product recommendations for products offered by the web retailers, and provides one of the identified product recommendations in connection with a product page associated with one of the web retailers.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07590562&OS=07590562&RS=07590562
owner: Google Inc.
number: 07590562
owner_city: Mountain View
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050629
---
Implementations described herein relate generally to electronic commerce and more particularly to the recommendation of products based on collaborative filtering of user data.

In recent years an increasing number of retailers have begun operating on the World Wide Web web . By offering products on the web these web retailers can gain access to a much broader base of customers.

Some existing retailers provide product recommendations to their customers. For example a retailer may track customer purchases and activities with regard to its web site and recommend products to its customers based on their purchases and activities.

Other existing retailers do not or cannot provide such product recommendations. For example a retailer may not have the customer base e.g. not enough customer purchases and or activity or the technology to provide meaningful product recommendations.

According to one aspect a method may include gathering user behavior data from a group of web retailers analyzing the user behavior data to identify product recommendations for products offered by the web retailers and providing one of the identified product recommendations in connection with a product page associated with one of the web retailers.

According to another aspect a system may include means for identifying product recommendations for products offered by a web retailer based on data relating to user activity associated with a group of web retailers and means for supplying the identified product recommendations with product pages served by the web retailer.

According to yet another aspect a system may include a data collector to obtain information relating to user purchases from a group of web retailers a recommended products identifier to identify a first product as a recommended product for a second product based on the information relating to user purchases and a recommended products supplier to present the recommended product for display with a product page associated with the second product and one of the web retailers.

According to a further aspect a method may include receiving a request from a user for recommended products associated with a product being viewed from a web site associated with a web retailer identifying one or more recommended products for the product in a database of recommended products that was compiled from information associated with a group of web retailers and providing the one or more recommended products to the user on behalf of the web retailer.

According to another aspect a method may include gathering user behavior data from at least one web retailer and at least one non web retailer analyzing the user behavior data to identify product recommendations for products offered by a particular web retailer and providing one of the identified product recommendations in connection with a product page associated with the particular web retailer.

The following detailed description of implementations consistent with the principles of the invention refers to the accompanying drawings. The same reference numbers in different drawings may identify the same or similar elements. Also the following detailed description does not limit the invention.

Implementations consistent with the principles of the invention are directed to providing product recommendations based on collaborative filtering of user behavior data. For example implementations described herein may leverage user behavior data associated with a group of web retailers and or non web retailers to provide product recommendations to users of a particular web retailer.

In one implementation user behavior data such as information associated with user purchases conversions and information associated with product pages and or product information pages users accessed and how much time the users spent accessing the product pages and or product information pages may be collected with regard to many users and many web retailers and or non web retailers. This information may then be used to provide product recommendations to a user browsing products associated with a particular web retailer.

While the description to follow will generally describe the providing of product recommendations to users of web retailers it should be understood that the description is equally applicable to the providing of recommendations associated with information and or services to users of web retailers.

Clients may include client entities. An entity may be defined as a device such as a personal computer a wireless telephone a personal digital assistant PDA a lap top or another type of computation or communication device a thread or process running on one of these devices and or an object executable by one of these devices. Servers may include server entities that gather process search and or maintain web pages in a manner consistent with the principles of the invention.

In an implementation consistent with the principles of the invention server may include a product recommendation system to provide product recommendations to users of at least some of servers . Server may gather user behavior data associated with users activities with regard to servers and or and perform collaborative filtering of the user behavior data to provide recommendation data to clients . Servers may be associated with web retailers. Servers may provide products services and or information for sale rent or browsing by users associated with clients . Servers may be associated with non web retailers. Servers may provide information such as reviews descriptions and or prices regarding products services and or information.

While servers are shown as separate entities it may be possible for one or more of servers to perform one or more of the functions of another one or more of servers . For example it may be possible that two or more of servers are implemented as a single server. It may also be possible for a single one of servers to be implemented as two or more separate and possibly distributed devices.

Network may include a local area network LAN a wide area network WAN a telephone network such as the Public Switched Telephone Network PSTN an intranet the Internet a memory device or a combination of networks. Clients and servers may connect to network via wired wireless and or optical connections.

Processor may include a processor microprocessor or processing logic that may interpret and execute instructions. Main memory may include a random access memory RAM or another type of dynamic storage device that may store information and instructions for execution by processor . ROM may include a conventional ROM device or another type of static storage device that may store static information and instructions for use by processor . Storage device may include a magnetic and or optical recording medium and its corresponding drive.

Input device may include a mechanism that permits an operator to input information to the client server entity such as a keyboard a mouse a pen voice recognition and or biometric mechanisms etc. Output device may include a mechanism that outputs information to the operator including a display a printer a speaker etc. Communication interface may include any transceiver like mechanism that enables the client server entity to communicate with other devices and or systems. For example communication interface may include mechanisms for communicating with another device or system via a network such as network .

As will be described in detail below the client server entity consistent with the principles of the invention may perform certain operations relating to the providing of product recommendations. The client server entity may perform these operations in response to processor executing software instructions contained in a computer readable medium such as memory . A computer readable medium may be defined as a physical or logical memory device and or carrier wave.

The software instructions may be read into memory from another computer readable medium such as data storage device or from another device via communication interface . The software instructions contained in memory may cause processor to perform processes that will be described later. Alternatively hardwired circuitry may be used in place of or in combination with software instructions to implement processes consistent with the principles of the invention. Thus implementations consistent with the principles of the invention are not limited to any specific combination of hardware circuitry and software.

Generally data collector may gather user behavior data and store it as a corpus of user behavior data. The user behavior data may include information relating to purchases conversions made by users which may be referred to as user purchase activity . In one implementation web retailer servers may provide information relating to purchases conversions to data collector . In another implementation data collector may obtain information relating to purchases in another way such as from clients and or non web retailer servers . From this information data collector may identify products that users purchased together. For example a web retailer server might inform data collector that a user purchased CREST toothpaste and a REACH toothbrush during the same online session e.g. in the same purchase transaction . Data collector may store this information in the corpus.

It may be possible for different web retailer servers to label the same product differently. In this case data collector may normalize information relating to product labels or names. For example if web retailer server A called CREST MultiCare Cool Mint toothpaste Crest mc cm tp web retailer server B called it Crest mc cm toothpaste and web retailer server C called it Crest MultiCare Cool Mint toothpaste data collector may normalize this information to Crest MultiCare Cool Mint toothpaste or some other consistent variation. Alternatively recommended products identifier may normalize the information when analyzing the user behavior data to identify product recommendations.

The user behavior data may also include information relating to what product pages users accessed and how long the users spent accessing these pages which may be referred to as user non purchase activity . In one implementation clients may provide information relating to product pages users accessed and how long the users spent accessing these pages to data collector . For example a client may contain software such as toolbar software that monitors a user s web activities to assist in making the user s online experience more useful. The toolbar software may periodically provide information e.g. Uniform Resource Locators URLs relating to product pages the user accessed and how long the user spent accessing these pages to data collector . In another implementation data collector may obtain information relating to product pages users accessed and how long the users spent accessing these pages in another way such as from web retailer servers . From this information data collector may identify products that users accessed during the same online session and or products that the users spent a lot of time e.g. at least a predetermined amount of time accessing which may infer an interest in those products during the session. Data collector may store this information in the corpus.

The user behavior data may also include information relating to what product information pages e.g. review pages price comparison pages product description pages etc. users accessed and how long the users spent accessing these pages which may also be referred to as user non purchase activity . In one implementation clients may provide information relating to product information pages users accessed and how long the users spent accessing these pages to data collector . For example toolbar software on a client may periodically provide information e.g. URLs relating to product information pages the user accessed and how long the user spent accessing these pages to data collector . In another implementation data collector may obtain information relating to information pages users accessed and how long the users spent accessing these pages in another way such as from non web retailer servers . From this information data collector may identify products associated with product information pages that users accessed during the same online session and or products associated with product information pages that the users spent a lot of time e.g. at least a predetermined amount of time accessing which may infer an interest in those products during the session. Data collector may store this information in the corpus.

Recommended products identifier may access the user behavior data in the corpus to identify recommended products. For example recommended products identifier may determine for each product what other product s users purchased or were interested in e.g. spent a lot of time accessing during the same online session. Recommended products identifier may operate based on a set of thresholds such that for product A to be considered a recommended product with regard to product B product A must occur at least some threshold number of times in conjunction with product B. Another threshold may identify the amount of user behavior data that is needed to generate useful recommendations for a product. Yet other thresholds may be set as necessary to make the product recommendations meaningful to a user.

Recommended products identifier may store information regarding products and their recommended products in database . is an exemplary diagram of database according to an implementation consistent with the principles of the invention. Database may be embodied within a single memory device or within multiple possibly distributed memory devices. Database may include a product name field and a recommended products field .

Product name field may store information relating to different products that web retailer servers sell. Product name field may store information relating to a product in one or more forms of specificity. For example product name field stores information about a specific type of toothpaste CREST MultiCare Cool Mint toothpaste product name field stores more general information about a type of toothpaste CREST MultiCare toothpaste and product name field stores even more general information about a type of toothpaste CREST toothpaste . The particular form of specificity may be implementation specific or based on one or more factors such as the amount of behavior data relating to the product in the corpus.

Recommended products field may list one or more products that are recommended for the product identified in product name field . The recommended products may include those products identified by recommended products identifier as related in some manner to the product identified in product name field e.g. users purchased both products together users were interested in one of the products when purchasing the other product or users were interested in both products during the same online session . As shown in users who purchased CREST toothpaste also purchased or were interested in DIAL Deodorant soap GLIDE Tape Original dental floss REACH Performance toothbrush and CLAIROL Herbal Essences shampoo.

Similar to the products in product name field recommended products field may store information relating to a product in one or more forms of specificity. For example recommended products field may store information about a specific type of product e.g. GLIDE Tape Original dental floss and REACH Performance toothbrush and or more general information about a type of product DIAL Deodorant soap and CLAIROL Herbal Essences shampoo . The particular form of specificity may be implementation specific or based on one or more factors such as the amount of behavior data relating to the product in the corpus.

Returning to recommended products supplier may supply product recommendations from database to clients on behalf of web retailer servers . For example recommended products supplier may provide product recommendations for display within product pages associated with web sites of web retailer servers . In an alternative implementation recommended products supplier may provide product recommendations to web retailer servers for inclusion on their product pages.

Processing may begin with the gathering of user behavior data block . As explained above the user behavior data may include information relating to purchases conversions made by users of web retailer servers . In one implementation web retailer servers may supply information relating to purchases conversions that occurred on their web sites. The user behavior data may also or alternatively include information relating to what product and or product information pages users accessed and how long the users spent accessing these pages. In one implementation software on clients may supply information relating to product and or product information pages users accessed e.g. URLs of the product pages and how long the users spent accessing these pages.

A database that maps products to their product recommendations may be created such as database based on the user behavior data block . To create the database the user behavior data may be analyzed block and normalized block if necessary to identify recommended product information if any associated with each product name block . For example it may be determined for each product what other product s users purchased or were interested in e.g. spent a lot of time accessing during the same online session.

If during online sessions with web retailers users generally purchased product A and B together product A may be considered a recommended product for product B and vice versa. If during online sessions with web retailers users generally spent a lot of time accessing product A when purchasing product B product A may be considered a recommended product for product B and vice versa. If during online sessions with web retailers users generally spent a lot of time accessing both products A and B product A may be considered a recommended product for product B and vice versa even if the users generally purchased neither product.

Returning to the product recommendations may be provided on behalf of the web retailers block . For example the web retailers may insert a piece of code called a creative on their product pages. The creative may include for example JavaScript or other code designed to be downloaded and executed by web browsers or other software at clients . The code when executed at a client may cause client to request recommended products from product recommendation system . The request may include for example an identification of the web retailer and the product or product page currently being accessed at the web retailer. In response product recommendation system may transmit product recommendations to client . The product recommendations may be provided in conjunction with the product page from the web retailers. For example the product recommendations may be integrated and displayed with the product page or provided for display within a pop up window or the like in conjunction with the product page.

The product recommendations provided in conjunction with a product page may include relevant product recommendations. By relevant it is meant those recommendations that are applicable not only to the product on the product page but also to the web retailer selling the product e.g. it would not be useful to recommend products that the web retailer does not sell . The product associated with a product page may be determined for example by crawling the web site of the web retailer and associating the URL of the page with the name of the product. A list of the products that the web retailer sells can also be determined for example by crawling the web site of the web retailer or by analyzing a site map or the like.

The product recommendations may appear as or include links within the product page. In one implementation these links may refer to product recommendation system . When a user selects e.g. clicks on one of these links product recommendation system may redirect the user s browser to the appropriate product page of the web retailer. In another implementation these links may include references to both product recommendation system and the appropriate product page of the web retailer. When a user selects e.g. clicks on one of these links the product page may be displayed to the user and product recommendation system may be sent information informing product recommendation system that the link was selected. In either situation product recommendation system may in some possible implementations use the user link selection as a basis for charging the web retailer. Other techniques for charging the web retailer are of course possible. Such techniques may include charging the web retailer when recommended products are actually purchased or placed in a shopping cart or charging the web retailer a flat rate for the product recommendation service.

As shown in assume that a web retailer momandpopclothingstore.com sells men s and women s clothing online. To obtain product recommendations the web retailer may coordinate with server or an operator of server to obtain a block of code e.g. a creative to insert in the product pages on its web site. The web retailer may insert the creative in its product pages. As shown in the web retailer inserted a creative on a product page associated with Slappy black leather shoes.

As shown in in one implementation when a user thereafter accesses the product page relating to Slappy black leather shoes on the web retailer s web site the product page may provide product recommendations. In this implementation for example the user is informed that customers who were interested in this item Slappy black leather shoes were also interested in a Happy black women s belt and Pappy charcoal women s pants.

As shown in in another implementation when a user thereafter accesses the product page relating to Slappy black leather shoes on the web retailer s web site the product page may provide product recommendations. In this implementation for example the user is informed of what customers typically purchased after viewing this item Slappy black leather shoes . As shown in 68 of customers purchased Slappy black leather shoes after viewing the product page associated with Slappy black leather shoes 11 of customers purchased Happy black leather shoes after viewing the product page associated with Slappy black leather shoes and 2 of customers purchased Slappy brown leather shoes after viewing the product page associated with Slappy black leather shoes.

Implementations consistent with the principles of the invention may leverage user behavior information associated with a group of web retailers and or non web retailers to provide product recommendations to customers on a product page of a web retailer that may not have the customer base or the technology to provide useful product recommendations itself.

The foregoing description of implementations consistent with the principles of the invention provides illustration and description but is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed. Modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teachings or may be acquired from practice of the invention.

For example while series of acts have been described with regard to the order of the acts may be modified in other implementations consistent with the principles of the invention. Further non dependent acts may be performed in parallel.

It will be apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art that aspects of the invention as described above may be implemented in many different forms of software firmware and hardware in the implementations illustrated in the figures. The actual software code or specialized control hardware used to implement aspects consistent with the principles of the invention is not limiting of the invention. Thus the operation and behavior of the aspects were described without reference to the specific software code it being understood that one of ordinary skill in the art would be able to design software and control hardware to implement the aspects based on the description herein.

No element act or instruction used in the present application should be construed as critical or essential to the invention unless explicitly described as such. Also as used herein the article a is intended to include one or more items. Where only one item is intended the term one or similar language is used. Further the phrase based on is intended to mean based at least in part on unless explicitly stated otherwise.

