---

title: T/R module for satellite TT and C ground link
abstract: Transmit/Receive (T/R) module that provides multiple simultaneous ground to satellite links with rapid pointing and acquisition. The (T/R) module incorporates independent gain and phase control. Left-hand or right-hand circular polarization can be supplied to dual feed antennas. Present invention allows each antenna to be independently polarized. Low-cost componentry is utilized throughout. On-board control of the (T/R) module is obtained using a complex programmable logic device (CPLD) and a micro controller. CPLD provided separate control of four phase shifters, attenuators, channel polarization as well as transmitter on/off control. Telemetry is provided through built-in test (BIT) routine.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07071873&OS=07071873&RS=07071873
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Air Force
number: 07071873
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050429
---
This patent application claims the priority benefit of the filing date of provisional application Ser. Nos. 60 566 788 60 566 768 and 60 566 770 all having been filed in the United States Patent and Trademark Office on Apr. 30 2004 and now incorporated by reference herein.

The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalty thereon.

This invention relates generally to the design of a Transmit and Receive TR module and more specifically to such Transmit and Receive modules suitable for a Phase Array Antenna PAA which could provide multiple simultaneous ground to satellite links with pointing and acquisition taking seconds. This invention also relates to the field of digital control design where a digital circuit is used to interface with the Antenna Control Computer to control the Transmit and Receive module.

Satellites require timely tracking telemetry and command TT C for payload operation. The ground antenna is one of the key elements that enables satellite control and payload operations. To support the operation of a large number of satellites at various orbits operators need a network of antennas distributed around the globe such as the Air Force Satellite Control Network AFSCN to contact satellites at a predetermined time and location. Currently they use large mechanically steered parabolic dishes to provide hemispherical coverage and simultaneous transmit Tx and receive Rx capabilities in support of Department of Defense DoD satellite operations SATOPS . Network designers used reflector antennas because of relatively low acquisition cost. The current reflector antennas used to support satellite operations are approximately 10 m in diameter and are susceptible to single point failure and long downtime for repair and maintenance. The antenna can only link to one satellite at a time and must handle multiple satellite contacts serially. Because of the mechanical movement and heavy weight of the reflector antenna operators cannot quickly schedule consecutive satellite contacts. The relatively long preparation and link time of reflector antennas produces a scheduled gap time of 30 minutes or more between two satellites. Because of these factors the efficiency of reflector antenna operation is low in terms of throughput and turnaround time. The mechanical nature of the antenna also limits its flexibility to support new SATOPS requirements and operational concepts. In addition the high operational and maintenance cost of a large reflector antenna contributes to its high life cycle cost despite its lower initial cost. Other limitations include cable wrap and keyhole effect. In addition separate antennas are required for multiple satellite contacts. Current AFSCN resources are operating at or near saturation.

It is clearly desirable for the current satellite operations to have a more efficient and flexible antenna system. To date phased array antennas have not been used for satellite TT C operations primarily because of their high acquisition cost in comparison to technically inferior but cheaper conventional reflector antennas. However due to the maturation of S band component technology provided by the cell phone industry mass production of affordable electronically steered array ESA antennas is feasible. The electronically scanned phase array antenna PAA can offer superior performance operability adaptability and maintainability for satellite operation.

Low cost component design and implementation issues are critical in developing a practical phased array antenna. Because the Transmit and Receive modules usually make up 40 50 of the PAA cost it is very critical to minimize the T R module cost and consequently the antenna cost.

Affordable phase antenna arrays operating at microwave frequencies are envisioned to consist of Transmit and Receive modules that employ microwave integrated circuits located at each radiating element of the aperture. The antenna system consists of separate receiver and transmit aperture capable of rapid beam motion. The transmitter antenna should be capable of high radiation power levels and the receiver antennas must achieve high G T ratios. Beam agility and high radiated power levels in association with the close spacing between the radiators drive the antenna design. The requirement for fast beam switching will require digital control circuits to calculate phase shift settings. A high RF radiated power level developed from closely spaced RF amplifiers generates very large heat densities. This forces the transmit antenna to increase in area to where beam pointing accuracy limits the array size. The great number of elements in the array emphasizes the need to develop a practical method of distributing control signals throughout the array. A Geodesic Spherical phase array antenna is considered for Air Force Satellite Communication network. Implicit in the system function array is the need to operate the array in full duplex operation. Additionally the array should be capable of controlling fundamental radiation characteristics such as bean width beam size side lobe levels and radiated power in order to realize different antenna characteristics required by the various satellites. The array aperture consists of a large number of radiating elements that are spaced approximately half a wavelength at the upper end of the operational frequency band. The frequency response and excitation of each element in the aperture can be independently controlled. The aperture can be fully or partially utilized either to direct energy over a large volume or intentionally direct in a certain direction. Additionally radar and communications require both transmission and reception of energy where as end system multicast ESM and Electronic Countermeasure ECM systems require only reception of energy. The capability of the array to provide transmit and receive functions simultaneous and to rapidly alter the set of configurations is possible due to active element digital control circuit. The active control circuits allow the Phase Array Radar to control their radiation characteristics. The aperture can be uniformly illuminated to achieve maximum gain or tapered illuminated to achieve low side lobes or shaped beam. The combination of the variable attenuator and phase shifter permits the array illumination to be modified and the antenna beam to be scanned in any direction. The filter specifies the portion of the aperture used by a particular system. The phase shifter the variable attenuator and the amplifier are components that have been developed in MMIC microwave monolithic integrated circuit technology in the last decade.

Solutions are required to meet the prior art s need for a high degree of isolation between transmit and receive channels while maintaining the affordability associated with low cost ceramic filters and traditional filters low cost MMIC based power amplifiers for transmit channels and low cost phase shifters.

Also needed are solutions now lacking in the prior art for interfacing a T R module interface with a beam former hot condition operation polarization diversity dual transmit and receive channels low cost with justification high isolation between transmit and receive channels digital control on board ruggedness and reliability.

It is therefore an object of the present invention to provide an apparatus that overcomes the dependence of Air Force satellite control network AFSCN on mechanically steered parabolic antennas that provide Transmit and Receive TR capabilities in support of satellite operations SATOPS .

It is a further object of the present invention is to provide an apparatus for on board control of Transmit and Receive modules using field programmable gate array FPGA or a complex programmable logic device CPLD and a micro controller.

It is still a further object of the present invention is to provide an apparatus for polarization of Transmit and Receive modules. This requires a means of addressing two dual feed antennas as left hand or right hand circular polarization. Having a beam polarization is required for the operation of the T R module in a phase array antenna.

Briefly stated the present invention achieves these and other objects through design of a Transmit and Receive module that can provide two separate Transmit Tx and two Receive Rx links to a satellite. In addition beam switching and on board digital control have been implemented where each of the Tx and Rx channels provide four bit phase shift and five bit amplitude control. The T R module is configured to receive synchronous serial signals that are used to control T R Module settings e.g. set amplitude and phase values and to instruct a T R Module to perform a built in test BIT . Built in test circuit monitors the module temperature and status of the RF devices. The polarization switching is incorporated in the module by using a RF switch power combiner and a 90 deg hybrid. Both left hand and right hand circular polarization is achieved in the transmit and receive section of the module.

Each Transmit and Receive module consists of a separate RF board and a DC control unit that interfaces the RF board and controls the MMIC s on the RF board. The module consists of a total of six RF I O ports two transmit inputs two receive outputs and two antenna ports. The transmitted signal is input at one of the transmit input ports and undergoes transformation phase or magnitude before being transmitting through a high rejection low pass ceramic filter reaching the output antenna ports. For the downlink receiver the input signal is fed to a high rejection band pass ceramic filter using Antenna Antenna port and undergoes transformation phase or magnitude before passing through one of the receive outputs. The input signal in the Transmit and Receive module is programmatically transformed by controlling the MMIC chips on the RF board through a digital control circuitry. The Transmit and Receive module in turn communicates with an antenna control computer that sends data to the T R Modules to control T R Module settings e.g. set amplitude and phase values and to instruct a T R Module to perform a built in test BIT . A low power complex programmable logic device CPLD on the digital board receives the synchronous signals from the Antenna control computer and depending on the received command latches the data to one of the four RF channels. A micro controller with analog to digital converter peripherals is used to sense the module temperature and transmit and receive currents and send this data back to the Antenna control computer.

The power supplies to the Transmit and Receive module are routed through power switches which have short circuit and thermal protection features and this allows hot plugging mechanism for the module. This is a nice feature to have in a Transmit and Receive module as this allows the replacement of a faulty module in the system without turning off the whole system. The module has an over current feature that allows the digital board of the module to turn off the power to the RF board if the module takes abnormal current.

Therefore it is accurate to say that the present invention 1. A multi beam Transmit and Receive module will greatly increase the number of satellite communication links to the Air Force Satellite Control Network providing more reliable tracking telemetry and command 2. The module can accomplish multiple simultaneous operations with pointing and acquisition taking seconds. As such the present invention wherein a phase array antenna PAA using this Transmit and Receive module can offer superior performance operability adaptability and maintainability for satellite operation.

According to an embodiment of the invention apparatus for performing Transmit and Receive operation in a Transmit and Receive module comprise a six pin RF front connecter to interface with the beam former a digital phase shifter and a digital attenuator power amplifiers and low noise amplifiers for the transmit and receive channels respectively 3 dB power splitter 90 deg hybrid plurality of single pole double throw SPDT switches plurality of five volts DC power switches and a temperature sensor.

According to a feature of the invention a multi channel Transmit and Receive module that has simultaneous transmit and receive capabilities for the incident signal this incident signal being programmatically controlled by the digital control board and a polarization circuit that can provide independent left hand and right hand circular polarization to the antenna ports.

The above and other objects features and advantages of the present invention will become apparent from the following description read in conjunction with the accompanying drawings in which like reference numerals designate the same elements.

Referring to represented are the dual channel transmitter signal inputs and dual receiver signal outputs of the present invention. The transmit frequency of operation is 1.75 2.1 GHz. The receiver frequency of operation is 2.2 2.3 GHz. Each of the dual transmit paths consists of an input or and output to either of the two diplexed antenna ports and . The transmitter signal passes through a four bit phase shifter or shift of 22.5 45 90 180 a SPDT switch or that is used to open close the RF path a five bit attenuator or attenuation levels of 1 dB 2 dB 4 dB 8 dB 16 dB a pre amplifier or and then through another absorptive type SPDT switch or before reaching the embedded power combiner or . The absorptive SPDT switch is used to induce left hand circular polarization LHCP and right hand circular polarization RHCP in the signal. A 90 degree hybrid is used to provide quadrature phase in the input signal. The quadrature output of the hybrid is amplified using MMIC power amplifiers and to a power output in excess of 30 dBm before transmitting through a high rejection low pass ceramic filter and . The overall gain of the transmitter channel is 20 dB.

Again referring to for each of the dual channels of the downlink receiver an input signal is fed through one of the two antenna input ports into a high rejection band pass ceramic diplexer filter . The input signal passes through a low noise amplifier and then a 90 deg hybrid . Following this hybrid the signal passes through an embedded power combiner or and then through another SPDT switch or . The signal then passes through gain block amplifiers or and also the attenuator or the phase shifter or and the SPDT switch or before reaching the receiver ports and . The total gain across the receiver band is 30 dB.

Referring to which shows the polarization circuit in the transmitter channel. The input signal enters through one of the input channels and depending on the configuration of the polarization switch or passes through one of the power combiners or . The output from the power combiner passes through the 90 deg hybrid and appears in quadrature at the output of the hybrid. If the signal passes through the top power divider then left hand circular polarization is achieved. If the signal passes through the bottom power combiner then right hand circular polarization is obtained. Prior to entering the antenna ports A and A the signal is amplified at output power amplifiers and respectively. Thus the output signals at the output antenna ports are always in phase quadrature with respect to each other. This is a requirement of the phase array antenna.

Referring to the DC board receives three synchronous serial signals Clock Data and enable from the Antenna control computer through the 18 pin external interface connector located at the front side of the T R Module. Synchronous serial signals Clock Data and enable and differential status signals are sent back from the DC board to the front interface connector. The front interface connector also includes power lines to supply the required power to the T R Module. These include the 5 low current and 5 high current signals.

Again referring to the CPLD is the main component in the design of the DC board. This device is a 128 macro cell component with enough I O s to supply the necessary control signals and to the different components of the RF board. This device is chosen from the cool runner II family of xilinx devices which have the advantages of very low power consumption. The speed grade of the device is chosen to be because speed is not a critical factor in the design and to keep the design cost minimal. is the programming connector for the CPLD.

Once more referring to the on board PIC micro controller sends the module s status information BIT to the antenna control computer using the RS 485 multi drop output . An on board temperature sensor LM20 is used to sense the temperature of the module. The current supplied to the transmitter and receiver amplifiers is measured using precise current sense resistors and amplified using a very stable current sense amplifier . This current sense amplifier as a very stable internal gain of 50 which avoids the use of external gain setting resistors. The basic functionality of the PIC controller is to provide the analog to digital converters that are used to gather the status information from the module. The micro controller contains a programming connector . An over current signal from the micro controller to the CPLD is activated if the micro controller senses abnormal RF current. The CPLD goes to sleep at this point. A BIT activate signal is toggled high if the CPLD receives a command from the antenna control computer to sent the BIT information.

Referring simultaneously to and which shows the component placement on the top side and bottom side of the digital board and represent 2 30 pins board connectors. These connectors are used to send the necessary control and power signals to the components on the RF side of the T R Module. Connector provides the control signals for the receiver and connector provides the control signals to the transmitter. Components and are power switches. The basic functionality of power switches and is to provide the required voltages to different components of the T R Module. All the external power supply signals feeding the T R module pass through power switches and which add additional isolation shielding from external signal spikes and fluctuations. Switches and have very good thermal and over current protection which allows the modules to be hot plugged into a powered system. Power switch provides the supply current for transmitter beam power amplifiers and power switch provides the supply current for transmitter beam power amplifiers. Power switch is a dual power switch with two outputs 5 volts for the components on the DC board and another 5 volts supplying power to the low noise amplifiers on the receiver side. Power switches and are capable of supplying a continuous current of up to 1 amp. Power switch has capability of 250 mA continuous current in each output. These chips also provide an over current signal which goes low if the switch detects a current which is out of range of the supply current limit of the output. This signal is used by the micro controller see to disable the power switches.

Again referring to JTAG and ICD2 programming connectors and are used to program the on board cool runner CPLD and micro controller see respectively. These connectors stay on the board even after the devices are programmed. This should help ease the reconfiguration of the on board controllers should future modification be necessary.

Once more referring to regulators and represent the on board regulators used to provide stable voltage to the components on the DC board. Regulator is a very low drop out voltage regulator. This regulator is the only source of 5 volts for the DC board. Regulator is a dual voltage regulator 1.8 V 3.3 V that provides the necessary voltages to the CPLD . This regulator in turn receives its input power from the low drop out voltage regulator .

Again referring to voltage level shifter interfaces the CPLD and PIC microcontroller with the external synchronous signals clock date and enable that are sent from the antenna control computer see . The commands sent from the antenna control computer are TTL level signals that are converted to low voltage signals of 0 3.3 V. This chip further isolates the internal circuitry of the DC board from any external noise on the command signals.

The interconnection between the different blocks on the DC board are shown in . The interface block diagram shows both the top and bottom connectors and on the same side. The DC board is a five layer FR4 board. The micro controller see is programmed using ICD2 debugger connector and the CPLD see is programmed according to standard JTAG specification using the connector . A total of 17 control signals and are sent to each receiver and a total of 16 control signals and are sent to each transmitter. Additionally power supply lines and supply the low noise amplifiers on receiver and receiver beams respectively. These are continuous supply lines from the power switch and are enabled at board power up.

Again referring to high current lines supply the power amplifiers on transmitter and transmitter respectively. Unlike power supply lines and the user has the option of turning on off these supply lines. Also unlike power supply lines and which share the same power switch high current lines and are sourced from two separate power switches.

The three synchronous serial signals from the antenna control computer are routed to both the CPLD see and also the micro controller see . Once the CPLD receives the data on a latch high it sends the data to the selected channel. The PIC microcontroller also stores a copy of the received data. Upon request this data along with the BIT data is sent to the antenna control computer. Lines and represent 5 low power and 5 high power supply lines.

Referring to synchronous serial interface for which the timing diagram is depicted consists of clock data and latch signals from the antenna control computer to T R modules when it reaches the module is single ended TTL at CMOS levels defined as a high level being 3.5 V minimum and a low signal being 0.4 V maximum. The maximum beam update rate is limited by the speed of the micro controller on the T R Module. This microcontroller sends the module status data to the antenna control computer . The maximum beam update rate on the T R module is 4 MHz. BIT information is sent back from the module to the antenna control computer .

Having described preferred embodiments of the invention with reference to the accompanying drawings it is to be understood that the invention is not limited to those precise embodiments and that various changes and modifications may be effected therein by one skilled in the art without departing from the scope or spirit of the invention as defined in the appended claims.

