---

title: Systems, methods, and programs for detecting unauthorized use of mobile communication devices or systems
abstract: Systems, methods, and programs for generating an authorized user profile for a mobile communication device, may sample an audio stream generated by the mobile communication device during communication and may store the audio sample. The systems methods and programs may determine an audio characteristic of the stored audio sample and may create the authorized user profile based on the audio characteristic. Systems, methods, and programs for detecting unauthorized use of a mobile communication device may sample an audio stream generated by the device during communication, may determine an audio characteristic of the audio sample, and may compare the determined audio characteristics of the sample with an authorized user profile.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08189783&OS=08189783&RS=08189783
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property II, L.P.
number: 08189783
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051221
---
The use of mobile communication devices and systems is steadily increasing as a primary method of electronic communication. As the number of mobile communication devices and mobile system accounts increases more devices are being lost and or stolen and more system accounts are being accessed by unauthorized users.

Conventionally service providers have attempted to implement various biometric security measures to prevent the unauthorized use of devices and or services. For example some portable computers implement fingerprint scanners for access. Additionally some telephone service providers have implemented voice recognition and passphrases to access calling card services.

Currently when a mobile communication device or system is used by an unauthorized user the only way to determine that the phone or service is being used is for the owner to monitor the usage records and identify unauthorized usages. However in many cases these usage records are not immediately available. Furthermore if the owner has no reason to suspect unauthorized use the owner may have no reason to monitor the usage. As a result the device and or service owner may be liable for the unauthorized usage of the device and or service. Furthermore any personal information associated with the device and or service may be compromised.

Systems methods and programs are disclosed that detect the unauthorized use of mobile communication devices or systems by sampling the audio transmitted by the device and or system and comparing the audio sample to an authentic voice profile.

Systems methods and programs are disclosed for generating an authorized user profile for a mobile communication device that may sample an audio stream generated by the mobile communication device during communication and may store the audio sample. The systems methods and programs may determine an audio characteristic of the stored audio sample and may create the authorized user profile based on the audio characteristic. Systems methods and programs are disclosed for detecting unauthorized use of a mobile communication device that may sample an audio stream generated by the device during communication may determine an audio characteristic of the audio sample and may compare the determined audio characteristics of the sample with an authorized user profile.

According to the following examples mobile communication devices may include for example cell phones Personal Digital Assistants PDAs combination devices e.g. voice and e mail internet gamming and or global positing system GPS personal handyphone systems PHS satellite telephones family service radios citizens band CB radios family radio service FRS radios general mobile radio service GMRS radios various military frequency radios and communication devices devices that communicate over wireless networks such as Wi Fi and WiMAX and or any other device capable of transmitting audio communication. Communication services may include for example Voice over Internet Protocol VoIP accounts and audio messages sent via e mail.

The network may include for example a wired or wireless network such as for example one or more of a wired telephone network a wireless telephone network a radio network an intranet an extranet a local area network a wide area network a storage area network and or the Internet. Where the network is a telephone network wired or wireless or a large scale computer network such as the Internet only that portion of the network that receives voice samples and transmits them to and or between the voice authentication system and or the end user mobile device may be part of the system . Alternatively the voice authentication system may be included within the end user mobile device in which case the network need not be included in the system .

It should be appreciated that the end user mobile device may be wiredly connected to the network such as for example a personal computer connected to the Internet. As a result the end user device need not itself be mobile. For example in the case of a VoIP account the actual device is not mobile but for example a user identifier such as a PIN a password or the like is mobile such that the account may be accessed from multiple locations. Accordingly for the purpose of the following examples such physically non mobile end user devices with mobile user identifiers may be considered mobile end user devices since the location of access is mobile.

In general operation the voice authentication system may collect one or more audio samples of the primary user of the end user mobile device and develops an authentic voice profile. The authentic voice profile may be based on one or more audio patterns obtained by evaluating the one or more audio samples of the primary user. Building and using authentic voice profiles may use a commercial technology available today know as speaker verification technology. The authentic voice profile may also use other characteristics that are not a standard part of current speaker verification technology and or new technology developed in the future for verifying the identity of a speaker. The authentic voice profile may include for example features based on short term spectra inflection patterns pitch patterns tone patterns speed patterns pause patterns and or any other characteristic of the primary users voice. The authentic voice profile need not be tied to the syntax or grammar i.e. any of the specific words spoken rather the sample may include one or more characteristics of the manner in which the primary user speaks. In this manner the authentic voice profile may be language independent and doesn t require a user to speak a particular word in order to evaluate a sample.

In determining the authentic voice profile various statistical operations may be applied to a number of samples in order to increase the confidence of the authentic sample. For example the samples could be evaluated to distinguish the primary user of the device from for example another person using the device. This may be done for example by identifying the various voices associated with the various audio samples for example by inflection patterns pitch patterns tone patterns speed patterns or any other audio characteristic and determining which voice occurs most frequently. This method of detection is based upon the assumption that the primary user will be represented in the majority of the audio samples taken.

Then once the primary user is identified the voice samples of the primary user may be evaluated to develop authentic voice profile. A useable authentic voice profile may be based on as few as one sample a useable authentic voice profile may be based on a predetermined number of samples or a developed authentic sample may be considered usable when variations in one or more of the audio characteristics is within predetermined statistical tolerances e.g. the inflection patterns pitch patterns tone patterns speed patterns and or any other audio characteristic patterns of a most recent sample are within a certain standard deviation of the corresponding inflection patterns pitch patterns tone patterns speed patterns pause patterns and or any other audio characteristic patterns of the authentic voice profile .

Once authentic voice profile is determined the voice authentication system continues to sample audio from the transmissions of the end user mobile device . These subsequent samples for example may be taken from each transmission every predetermined number of transmissions or at random. The voice authentication system then evaluates one or more of the subsequent samples in a similar manner as above to extract audio characteristics and compare the extracted audio characteristics with the authentic voice profile to determine if the primary user is a participant in the transmission.

If the primary user is not participant of one or more of the subsequent samples the voice authentication system may determine that the end user mobile device is being used by an unauthorized user. This determination may be made based on as few as one subsequent sample. Alternatively the determination may be made if a predetermined percentage of a predetermined number of subsequent samples does not include the primary user.

Based on the determination that the end user mobile device is being used by an unauthorized user the device s service may be for example suspended and the primary user may be notified by an alternate channel that the device or password to a service has been lost or stolen. Furthermore if the device is equipped with GPS its location may be determined. Alternatively the device s stationary location may be identified by an IP address. As a result the unauthorized user s location may be provided to the user and or reported to the police.

While shows system using a bus architecture any type of hardware architecture including wired and wireless networks may be used based on implementation details. For example memory and network interface may be individually connected to controller . Also these hardware components may be implemented using any available hardware technology such as FPGA PAL application specific integrated circuits ASICs etc.

As shown in the memory may be physically functionally and or conceptually divided into for example an authentic voice profile portion and or a recent voice samples portion . The authentic voice profile portion may store audio characteristics of the primary user s authenticated voice samples. The recent voice samples portion may store voice samples from recent usage of the mobile end user device .

The memory shown in can be implemented using any appropriate combination of alterable memory and or non alterable memory. The alterable memory whether volatile or non volatile can be implemented using any one or more of static or dynamic RAM a removable disk and disk drive a writeable or re writeable optical disk and disk drive a hard drive and or flash memory. Similarly the non alterable or fixed memory can be implemented using any one or more of ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM and or an optical ROM disk such as CD ROM or DVD ROM disk.

The voice analyzer may input a voice sample and determine the sample s various audio characteristics. The voice analyzer may also compare the audio characteristics of one voice sample with the audio characteristics of another voice sample and determine whether the samples are from the same user.

The voice sampler may input an audio stream and extract audio samples representative of the audio stream. The samples may be taken at the beginning of the audio stream. For example when in the context of a telephone call certain words are commonly used such as hello thereby allowing the audio characteristics to be derived from a similar word. However because the system compares audio characteristics of speech rather than relying on specific words the samples may be taken at any point in the audio stream irrespective of the words spoken.

The network interface may allow one or more of the elements of the system to communicate with a network such as for example network .

In general there are two phases of operation of the exemplary unauthorized use detection system the authentic profile preparation phase and the unauthorized use detection phase. During the authentic profile preparation phase under control of the controller an audio stream associated with the end user device is input to the voice sampler for example via the network interface . Under control of the controller the voice sampler samples portions of the audio stream and stores the sampled portions in the recent voice samples portion . Alternatively the sampled portions may be input directly into the voice analyzer . The voice analyzer accesses the voice samples provided by the voice sampler and determines the audio characteristics of the samples. The determined characteristics under control of the controller are stored in the authentic voice profile portion

The sampled audio stream may be only that portion of the audio including the device user s voice. For example only the audio generated by a microphone on the associated end user device may be included in the audio stream.

Any subsequent audio samples generated from subsequent audio steams may also stored in the recent voice samples portion and their determined characteristics may be stored in the authentic voice profile portion . The subsequently determined characteristics may be separately stored for each audio stream or may be used to modify the previously stored profile e.g. to develop a range for each characteristic or a statistically processed range for example by ignoring extreme values .

The above process is repeated by the system until it is determined that the audio characteristics stored in the authentic voice profile portion are sufficient to identify the authentic user s voice in additional samples. For example the profile may be considered sufficient when a predetermined number of samples have been collected and analyzed or when the standard deviation of one or more of the stored characteristics is within a predetermined range. If the characteristics were stored separately for each sample upon the determination that they are sufficient to identify the authorized user the samples may be reduced to a single authentic voice profile. When the authentic profile is created the system may enter the second phase of operation.

During the unauthorized use detection phase audio streams collected from the end user mobile device and representing a user s voice are input under control of the controller to the voice sampler . Under control of the controller the voice sampler samples the audio stream and stores at least one sample in the recent voice samples portion . Alternatively the at least one sample may be input directly to the voice analyzer . Under control of the controller the voice analyzer inputs a recent sample and the authentic voice profile and compares the characteristics of the recent sample to the characteristics of the authentic voice profile. Under control of the controller the voice analyzer determines whether the recent sample contains the authorized user s voice by comparing the recent sample with the authentic voice profile. If the voice analyzer determines that the recent sample is not the authorized user under control of the controller the sample is stored in the recent voice samples portion with an indication that the sample is not the authorized user. Alternatively simply the indication of whether the sample is the authorized user may be saved and the sample itself discarded. If the voice analyzer determines that the recent sample is the authorized user under control of the controller the sample and or indication the sample is the authorized user is stored in the recent voice samples portion

When for example a certain number of samples have been evaluated and the indications have been stored in the recent voice samples portion or a certain amount of time has passed under control of the controller the authorized usage tester accesses the stored voice sample indications and determine whether the authorized user has been the primary user of the mobile end user device . The determination may be made based on for example whether a percentage of the stored indications that indicate a sample has been determined to be someone other than the authorized user exceeds a predetermined limit. Under control of the controller the determination may be output for use by for example a service provider.

It should be appreciated that according to the above example the system may continually monitor the usage tester may continually monitor the stored information after each sample is evaluated i.e the certain number of samples to be evaluated is one and make a decision after each sample.

One example of an exemplary method for developing an authorized user profile is shown in . The exemplary method may be implemented for example by one or more components of the above described systems . However even though the exemplary structure of the above described systems may be referenced in the description of the method it should be appreciated that the referenced structure is exemplary and the exemplary method need not be limited by any of the above described exemplary structure.

As shown in in step it is determined whether enough audio samples have been collected. If enough samples have been collected the authorized profile may be considered complete and in step operation ends. If enough samples have not been collected operation continues to step . The determination of whether enough samples may be made for example based on the total number of samples an elapsed time or whether one or more characteristics of all of the collected samples is within a particular standard deviation. In step it is determined whether the device is being used in communication. Once the device is being used in communication operation continues to step .

In step an audio sample is taken from the device s current communication. For example a portion of the audio received from the device s microphone i.e. the voice of the user of the device rather than the other party is sampled. Then in step the audio sample is evaluated to determine the audio characteristics of the user s voice. Next in step the audio characteristics determined from the sample are for example stored to create an authorized voice profile or used to update an existing authorized user profile. Operation of the method returns to step and repeats until enough samples have been collected.

One example of an exemplary method for evaluating messages is shown in . The exemplary method may be implemented for example by one or more components of the above described systems . However even though the exemplary structure of the above described systems may be referenced in the description of the method it should be appreciated that the referenced structure is exemplary and the exemplary method need not be limited by any of the above described exemplary structure.

As shown in the method begins in step where it is determined whether an end user mobile device is being used in communication. Once the device is being used in communication in step a portion of the communicated audio is sampled. Again for example the audio may be the audio originating the microphone of the device to ensure that the device user s voice is being sampled rather than another party involved in the communication. Operation continues to step .

In step the sampled audio is evaluated to determine its audio characteristics. Then in step the audio characteristics of the sample may be stored. In step it is determined whether enough samples have been evaluated and their audio characteristics stored. For example this determination may be made on the total number of samples or an amount of time that has elapsed since a previous evaluation of stored audio characteristics. If enough samples have not been collected operation returns to step . If enough samples have been collected operation continues to step where the stored audio characteristics are compared with the authorized user s profile.

For example each sample s audio characteristics may be compared with the authorized user s profile to determine whether the sample and thus the associated communication was made by the authorized user. The comparison may be made within certain statistical tolerances for example based on the reliability of the authorized user profile. For example if the authorized user profile is rather new that is based on only a few samples then the comparison may allow for a larger deviation form the profile to be considered a match. Similarly if the authorized user profile is based on many samples then the comparison may only allow for a smaller or no deviation from the profile to be considered a match.

Then the total number of stored characteristics of samples is evaluated to determine for example what percentage of the total number of samples represent communications by the authorized user. If a predetermined percentage of the samples do not include the authorized user then it may be determined that someone other than the authorized user is using the mobile end user device. In step operation of the method ends.

It should be appreciated that according to the above example once the stored samples and or indications are evaluated they may be discarded in order for another group of samples and or indications to be collected. Alternatively upon evaluation only the oldest sample and or indication may be discarded. Then once the next sample and or indication is obtained and evaluated the stored samples and or indications may be evaluated in effect creating an oldest out newest in rolling group of samples and or indications.

It should also be appreciated that according to the above example the order of the steps is not strict for example the samples may each be evaluated prior to being stored.

As a result of the above exemplary systems methods and programs it is possible to determine the likelihood that a mobile end user device is not being used by the primary authorized user. Thus when it is determined that the mobile end user device is not being used by the primary authorized user the primary authorized user and or the police may be notified and or provided with the location of the device if it is equipped with a GPS receiver.

However it is possible that a mobile end user device may have more than one authorized user. For example it is possible that a spouse sibling friend co worker etc. may use the phone and the primary user may not want to be notified of their use. Accordingly exemplary systems and methods may allow a second or subsequent user to be considered an authorized user of the mobile end user device . For example a second user authorization mode may be provided in which the second or subsequent user may actively provide voice samples that will be used to create a second authorized user profile. Alternatively upon notification that there will be a second user the device may attempt to evaluate each sample that is obtained and based on the samples audio characteristics group the samples by user. Then based on the grouped samples individual audio profiles may be provided for each user. Thus according to each exemplary process any number of users may be registered as authorized users.

It is also possible that the performance of speaker verification can be denigrated by changes in the environment in which the mobile device is being used. For example a user may add a headset and remote microphone to his existing cell phone or purchase a new cell phone handset for his account. It is also possible that multiple voice coders can be associated with a single device. For example 3G cellular networks may have variable rate coders and VoIP services may offer a variety of selectable coders. Changes such as these may alter the condition of the voice collection or transmission sufficiently to cause authentic users to be regularly identified as impostors.

Accordingly exemplary systems and methods may allow a user to update his voice profile. Alternatively the authorization system may automatically detect the state of characteristics such as the coder the cell phone model or the presence of a headset. If the condition is a new one not encountered before the authorization system may update the voice profile to reflect the new conditions. If the condition is already reflected in the voice profile the authorization tester can use this information as part of its testing process. For example the Detection System may keep two versions of a voice profile one for each of two voice coders. The Authorization Tester would use the version that matched the conditions of the current call.

While various features have been described in conjunction with the examples outlined above various alternatives modifications variations and or improvements of those features and or examples may be possible. Accordingly the examples as set forth above are intended to be illustrative. Various changes may be made without departing from the broad spirit and scope of the underlying principles.

