---

title: System for determining gas cartridge actuation state
abstract: A gas cartridge actuation state determination system includes a puncture pin adapted to abut an end of the gas cartridge. A load sensor coupled to and in line with the puncture pin. A spring bears against the load sensor. The spring's force is such that it is insufficient to cause the puncture pin to be driven through the end of the gas cartridge when the end has not been punctured, but is sufficient to cause the puncture pin to be driven through the end of the gas cartridge when the end has already been punctured. In addition, the spring's force is such that it will be approximately zero after the puncture pin has been driven through the end that has already been punctured. A device coupled to the load sensor determines when the spring force is approximately zero.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07445132&OS=07445132&RS=07445132
owner: The United States of America as represented by the Secretary of the Navy
number: 07445132
owner_city: Washington
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050824
---
The invention described herein may be manufactured and used by or for the Government of the United States of America for governmental purposes without the payment of any royalties thereon or therefor.

The present invention relates generally to gas cartridge actuation systems and more particularly to a system that determines whether a gas cartridge has been punctured or actuated.

Currently torpedoes launched from a surface vessel utilize the vessel s high pressure air just prior to launch to i mechanically release the torpedo from its weapon securing mechanism and ii detach the torpedo s electrical umbilical. More recently development efforts have focused on eliminating the use of the vessel s high pressure air for these functions. Specifically automotive airbag inflator systems have been selected to provide the launch energy source while gas cartridges have been selected to provide the energy to disable the weapon securing mechanism just prior to launch.

With respect to the use of gas cartridges for safety reasons it is desirable to open such a gas cartridge remotely i.e. puncture a sealed end of the gas cartridge as is known in the art. After each torpedo launch the actuated i.e. punctured gas cartridges must be manually replaced with a new gas cartridge that has not been previously actuated i.e. punctured . If a previously punctured cartridge were inadvertently used a torpedo misfire would result as the torpedo s weapon securing mechanism would not be released and the torpedo s electrical umbilical would not be detached.

Accordingly it is an object of the present invention to provide a system that determines whether or not a gas cartridge has been punctured or actuated.

Another object of the present invention is to provide a system that can be incorporated into a gas cartridge actuation system and be used to determine whether or not a gas cartridge has been punctured or actuated.

Other objects and advantages of the present invention will become more obvious hereinafter in the specification and drawings.

In accordance with the present invention a system determines a gas cartridge s actuation state. A puncture pin is adapted to have a first end thereof positioned to abut an end of the gas cartridge. A load sensor is coupled to and in line with a second end of the puncture pin. A spring having a spring force bears against the load sensor. The spring force is insufficient to cause the puncture pin to be driven through the end of the gas cartridge when the end has not been punctured but is sufficient to cause the puncture pin to be driven through the end of the gas cartridge when the end has already been punctured. In addition the spring force is approximately zero after the puncture pin has been driven through the end that has already been punctured. A device coupled to the load sensor determines when the spring force is approximately zero at which point an alarm can be triggered.

Referring now to the drawings and more particularly to a system for determining the actuation state of a gas cartridge is shown schematically and is referenced generally by numeral . Gas cartridge is any pressurized gas containing cartridge having an end A designed to be puncturable by application of the requisite amount of force whereby the gas in cartridge is released into the surrounding environment. Accordingly the term actuation state as used herein is indicative of a binary condition where a non actuated state refers to end A that has not been punctured i.e. there is gas in cartridge and an actuated state refers to end A that has already been punctured i.e. there is no gas in cartridge .

The basic structural elements of system include a pin a load sensor a spring and an electronics package . Pin is any rigid element having a tip A capable of puncturing end A when a sufficient force is applied to pin . Typically the force will be applied along the longitudinal axis B of pin . Pin is positioned such that tip A abuts end A. Load sensor is coupled to pin . Load sensor can be any load cell or other load sensing device capable of sensing measuring the force being applied to pin along axis B. Accordingly load sensor is typically placed in line with pin . Spring bears against and is in line with load sensor . In this simple illustration one end of spring bears against load sensor while spring is held in its compressed or stored energy state as its opposite end bears against a platform .

In the compressed state spring imparts a spring force Fto load sensor which in turn is applied along axis B of pin . Spring is selected such that spring force Fis far less than that required to be applied to pin to puncture end A. However spring force Fmust be sufficient to drive pin through end A if end A was previously punctured. Further spring is selected such that spring force Fis zero or approximately so after pin has been driven through a previously punctured end A. That is spring is only long enough and strong enough to drive pin into an existing puncture hole in end A at which point spring force Fbecomes negligible or zero.

Electronics package is coupled to load sensor to monitor the output thereof. In terms of monitoring the actuation state of gas cartridge load sensor will sense spring force Fwhich will be one of i equal to the compressed state spring force of spring when end A is not punctured or ii zero or approximately so if spring has been released from its compressed state as will be the case when end A has already been punctured. Accordingly electronics package can include a logic device A for recognizing the non actuated or actuated state indicated by the output of load sensor . Such logic devices are well known in the art and could include analog or digital circuits. An alarm B could be coupled to logic device A for issuing an alarm signal when logic device A recognized an actuated state of gas cartridge . The alarm signal could be realized by one or more of a visual alarm an audio alarm and a tactile alarm.

The present invention can be easily incorporated into any existing gas cartridge actuation system. For example illustrates the previously described elements of system coupled to a drive piston to which an actuation force Fis applied when end A is to be punctured so that gas in cartridge can be released. In this embodiment spring is held in its compressed state as it bears between an annular shoulder A of piston and load sensor . Further in the compressed state of spring drive piston is in contact with load sensor but is not coupled thereto. As a result prior to the application of actuation force F spring can drive load sensor pin through end A if end A was previously punctured.

The present invention could further be adapted to automatically prevent application of the above described actuation force F. For example illustrates the system shown in and further includes a lock mechanism coupled to logic device A. Lock mechanism is any device that mechanically or electronically prevents drive piston from imparting actuation force Fto load sensor pin when load sensor detects a spring force Fof approximately zero. Accordingly lock mechanism could be realized by a mechanical or electronic lock acting on drive piston to prevent movement thereof even if actuation force Fis applied thereto. Lock mechanism could also be realized by a device that prevents the actual application of actuation force F. In this case lock mechanism could issue a signal to electrically disable the device not shown applying actuation force Funtil such time that logic device A recognized a value of spring force Findicative of a non actuated gas cartridge .

The advantages of the present invention are numerous. The actuation state of a gas cartridge is easily determined by a system that is readily incorporated into existing gas cartridge actuation systems.

It will be understood that many additional changes in the details materials steps and arrangement of parts which have been herein described and illustrated in order to explain the nature of the invention may be made by those skilled in the art within the principle and scope of the invention as expressed in the appended claims.

