---

title: Efficient work flow system and method for preparing tax returns
abstract: A processor-based method for preparing a tax return using multiple service providers. The method includes receiving at a first service provider an image file that includes a plurality of data values and assigning at the first service provider the image file to a form having a plurality of predefined field names, wherein each of the plurality data values belong to one of the plurality of predefined field names. The method also includes receiving at a second service provider the image file and an input form having a plurality of input fields corresponding to the plurality of predefined field names and associating at the second service provider the plurality of data values from the image file with the plurality of input fields.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07853494&OS=07853494&RS=07853494
owner: SurePrep, LLC
number: 07853494
owner_city: Newport Beach
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050107
---
The invention relates generally to preparing tax returns and more particularly to an efficient work flow system and method for preparing tax returns.

Source documents e.g. W 2s Settlement Statements 1099s K 1s etc. are received from many different sources such as employers partnerships investment firms charities and so on and are used to prepare tax returns. Source documents may also be referred to as tax documents. These source documents may be submitted to a person who prepares tax returns for individuals and businesses. The person who prepares these tax returns generally referred to as a tax preparer has a high level of skill due to the intricacies and nuances of the internal revenue service s IRS s tax code and the knowledge required to accurately prepare tax returns. Even using a tax software product the tax preparer must have specialized training and expertise to navigate though the tax software product and to interpret information contained on the source documents. Therefore each tax return generally requires a different level of skill to accurately complete. For example a tax return with only W 2 and 1099 source documents requires the tax preparer to have less skill than a tax return with W 2 settlement statement and schedule C business income source documents. Accordingly due to the variations in skill required to prepare a tax return the tax preparer must have a wide range of knowledge and experience with tax return preparation.

For several reasons the preparation of a tax return was accomplished when one person at a time as opposed to multiple people simultaneously prepared the entire tax return. First the source documents are traditionally in paper format and only reside with one tax preparer at a time. The tax preparer can make copies and distribute them to multiple tax preparers however this increases the time spent preparing each tax return. For example additional time is spent photocopying and distributing the source documents tracking who is working with the source documents and merging work performed by each person into the tax return.

Second because the hard copy nature of the source documents promoted single person preparation currently available tax software products e.g. Turbo Tax Tax Cut ProSystem fx Tax GoSystem Tax Lacerte UltraTax ProSeries etc. only support one person entering data into a tax return at a time. For example conventional tax software products require the tax preparer to select and open a single tax return. Then the tax preparer gathers all the source documents reviews the source documents and inputs information from the source documents into the tax return. The tax preparer moves from one source document to the next until all the information for a specific tax return has been entered. Then the tax preparer can move to the next tax return. Therefore it is technically impossible to have multiple people simultaneously enter data into a single tax return because currently available tax software products only support one person entering data into a tax return at a time.

Another drawback of conventional tax preparation systems and methods is that the tax preparer must have a high level of expertise to prepare the more complicated portions of the tax return. However these expertise are wasted on the less complicated portions of the tax return. Accordingly the tax preparer s knowledge and skills are not fully utilized during preparation of an entire tax return.

Accordingly it should be appreciated that there is a need for an efficient work flow system and method for preparing tax returns by multiple people who have varying skill levels. The invention fulfills this need as well as others.

The invention allows the source documents to be scanned in to produce one or more image files or electronic source documents which can be simultaneously sent to multiple service providers. The service providers may be a computer system e.g. a software process or routine a person e.g. a data entry operator a tax preparer and a referencer and or any other person or system involved in the preparation of the tax returns. In one embodiment each electronic source document includes tax documents pertaining to a single tax return for a business or a single person or group of people. The invention allows for the distribution of the electronic source document and related input forms to one or more service providers the management of the work flow amongst multiple service providers the monitoring of the work loads of the service providers the preparation of the tax return by multiple service providers and the completion of the tax returns. The service providers may simultaneously prepare portions of one or more tax returns.

Some advantages of the invention may include increasing the total number of tax returns prepared in a given time period by having the tax preparer only spend time on the more complicated portions of the tax return and by having a service provider with less skill than the tax preparer simultaneously access the less complicated portions of the tax return. Hence while the tax preparer is working on the more complicated portions of the tax return the lower skilled lower paid service provider may be working on the less complicated portions of the tax return. Therefore the tax preparer s knowledge and skills are fully utilized during preparation of each tax return.

The increased productivity and reduced preparation costs are particularly important during tax season when accounting firms have an increased work load. During tax season accounting firms can hire or utilize lower skilled lower paid service providers who can more efficiently and effectively assist in the preparation of tax returns because they do not need the high level of skill required to prepare a tax return but rather only need the skills or training to enter data into specified data entry fields. For example an accounting firm can hire seasonal data entry operators instead of additional tax preparers who are difficult to find and hire during tax season. These seasonal data entry operators are easier to find and more economical to use than highly qualified trained and experienced tax preparers.

One embodiment of the invention includes a processor based method for preparing a tax return using multiple service providers. The method includes receiving at a first service provider an image file that includes a plurality of data values e.g. numbers text dates amounts or other defining data elements and assigning at the first service provider the image file to a form having a plurality of predefined field names wherein each of the plurality of data values belong to one of the plurality of predefined field names. The method also includes receiving at a second service provider the image file and an input form having a plurality of input fields corresponding to the plurality of predefined field names and associating at the second service provider the plurality of data values from the image file with the plurality of input fields.

One embodiment of the invention includes a processor based method for preparing a tax return using a plurality of service providers. The method may include receiving an electronic source document or image file having a plurality of data values associating the electronic source document with an input form containing a number of input fields related to the plurality of data values on the electronic source document and placing using a first service provider a reference adjacent to each of the plurality of data values. The method may also include extracting using a second service provider the plurality of data values that are adjacent to the references creating a tax return using the plurality of data values and creating a set of fully cross referenced work papers.

Reference will now be made to the preferred embodiments of the invention examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. While the invention will be described in conjunction with the preferred embodiments it will be understood that these embodiments are not intended to limit the scope of the invention. On the contrary the invention is intended to cover alternatives modifications and equivalents which may be included within the spirit and scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims. In the following detailed description numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the invention. However it will be understood by one skilled in the art that the invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances well known systems components methods and procedures have not been described in detail so as not to unnecessarily obscure the important features of the invention. As will be appreciated various embodiments of the invention are described herein and shown in the figures. The term link and reference may be used interchangeably in certain instances in this disclosure.

As shown in each tax return includes various source documents. As an example the source documents for TR include a W 2 sale of residence 1099 INT business income 1099 DIV and capital gains losses document. Generally the tax preparer works on one tax return at a time but allows one or more service providers to work on a subset of the source documents such as all W 2 and 1099 source documents related to the tax return the tax preparer is working on or to another tax return. For example to efficiently complete TR the tax preparer can work on the sale of residence business income and capital gains losses documents while allowing a first service provider to access and input information related to the W 2 source document a second service provider to access and input information related to 1099 INT source document and a third service provider to access and input information related to 1099 DIV source document.

Once the first service provider has completed the W 2 he can work on another W 2 for the same tax return if one exists or work on another W 2 for a different tax return. Even though the tax preparer is working on one of the source documents for TR service provider may be working on a W 2 for TR service provider may be working on a 1099 INT for TR and service provider may be working on a 1099 DIV for TR . Hence one or more service providers generally work on one tax document at a time and then move to the next tax document irrespective of whether it is from the same tax return or not. The tax preparer generally works on one tax return at a time before moving on to the next tax return. This allows one or more service providers to specialize on one or more tax document types and thus complete the tax return in a shorter amount of time. The extent of specialization for each service provider i.e. whether a data entry operator just works on a single source document type such as W 2s or works on multiple document types such as W 2s and 1099s is configurable depending on the size of the tax preparation operation. For example larger tax preparation operations tend to have greater specialization because they have more data entry operators and more volume.

Information related to these source documents can be input by a lower skilled data entry operator thus freeing up more time for the more skilled tax preparer to input information related to the sale of residence business income and capital gains losses source documents. In this example each service provider is responsible for learning and inputting information related to a different source document. Therefore each service provider needs to have a limited number of skills to complete its tasks for particular source documents. Once the information is input by the lower skilled data entry operators the tax preparer is notified that the information has been input for TR . Each service provider can operate at its own speed in completing its assigned tasks thus allowing multiple service providers to simultaneously work on the same tax return. The tax preparer determines which source documents should be accessible by the lower skilled service providers.

The computer system A generally controls the work flow amongst the other computer systems B D. For example a tax preparer using computer system A can allow one or more service providers using one or more computer systems B D the ability to retrieve input edit and save information to and from the memory . Similarly the tax preparer using computer system A can retrieve input edit and save information to and from the memory .

Source documents are generally in the form of paper documents that are received by a tax payer shortly after the end of each calendar year. Upon receipt by the tax payer the source documents are forwarded to a tax preparer for review and preparation of a tax return. To allow the tax preparer the ability to electronically access manage and work on the source documents using the computer system A the source documents can be scanned in to produce an image file or an electronic source document such as a portable document format PDF document or file using the scanner . Generally each electronic source document includes tax documents pertaining to a single tax return. Once scanned in the electronic source document can be stored in the memory S and pages of the electronic source document can be simultaneously accessed and viewed by multiple service providers from multiple locations to facilitate the efficient preparation of a tax return.

The electronic source document allows multiple service providers to work on the tax return from anywhere at anytime. The electronic source document is typically arranged as a sequence of individual pages where each page can have objects such as text graphics images color spaces annotations and so on. A document viewing software program such as Adobe Acrobat from Adobe Systems Incorporated of San Jose Calif. can be used to view the pages of the electronic source document. In one embodiment the tax preparer causes the computer system A to display one or more pages of the electronic source document.

Once the form type has been selected the tax preparer may input or if already input may select a form name identifying the page being displayed in the document view area S . The form name can be selected from a list of preexisting form names or can be added by inputting a form name representing the form name desired. For a W 2 form type the form name is generally the employer s name for a 1099 form type the form name is generally the payer s name and for a K 1 form type the form name is generally the partnership s name. Alternatively the computer system using an optical character reader OCR system can determine the form name by scanning the page . In the illustrated example the W 2 form type and the FLY BY NIGHT form name have been selected because the displayed page is a FLY BY NIGHT W 2 document.

At S the tax preparer determines whether a fully cross referenced set of work papers is desired as the final work product i.e. whether to place references on the page of the electronic source document . If not the tax preparer determines whether to send the tax document to a data entry operator for inputting of data values S . If so the tax preparer determines at S whether to send the tax document i.e. the page to a referencer for referencing S or whether to keep the tax document for referencing S . In one embodiment the tax preparer may make this determination based on the form type . For example if the form type is a standard form W 2 1099 K 1 etc. the tax document may be sent to the referencer. The tax preparer generally allows the service providers to access the standard forms because a lower level of skill is needed to input information related to these forms. If the form type is a non standard form settlement statement statement of business income loss etc. the tax document may be kept for referencing. Standard forms are forms that contain the same set of data and non standard forms are forms that do not contain the same set of data. For example W 2 forms always have standard fields such as Box 1 Wages tips and other compensation Box 2 Federal income tax withheld etc. No such standard fields exist for a statement of business income loss as such these forms would not be considered a standard form for these purposes.

S and S are optional steps of placing references on the page s of the electronic source document. For standard forms the data entry operator or the referencer may place references on the pages of the electronic source document S . For non standard forms the tax preparer may place references on the pages of the electronic source document S . Once the location of the reference is selected a pop up window appears with the same descriptions as those in the electronic source document. For example the phrase Box 1 Wages Tips and Other Compensation is on both the page and in the pop up window see . Hence the lower skilled data entry operator can easily select the correct field name from a list of field names . Referencing is performed for the purpose of creating a fully cross referenced set of work papers as a final work product. Further details regarding referencing and the cross referenced set of work papers can be found in co pending patent application Ser. No. 10 903 637 filed Jul. 30 2004 which is hereby incorporated by reference.

For standard forms the form type and or the form name of the page to be referenced is placed in a referencing queue located in the memory . When a referencer is available to reference a page of the electronic source document the available referencer request access to the next page of the electronic source document to be referenced by checking the referencing queue. The referencer may then access the page s of the electronic source document from the memory . is a page of the electronic source document as seen by a referencer illustrating a W 2 document from ABC INC. As shown in the referencer does not have the ability to view all the form types related to the tax return as shown in the forms view area of .

Referencers may be assigned to one or more standard form types. For example referencers may be assigned to a sub set of standard forms which increases efficiency because the referencers only need to know the details about that specific group of standard forms. In one embodiment each referencer may be assigned to only one standard form e.g. W 2 forms . In this embodiment each referencer only needs to know the details about one standard form further increasing the efficiency of placing references on each page of the electronic source document. Alternatively the tax preparer can act as the referencer and place the references on the page of the electronic source document. After the referencing is complete the referencer may select a submit icon indicating to the tax preparer that the page of the electronic source document has been referenced.

The computer system inserts enables or displays the page of the electronic source document and an input form having a plurality of input fields corresponding to the form type S S . That is based on the form type the plurality of input fields are predetermined and are retrieved from the memory . The data entry operator or the tax preparer inputs the numbers shown on the page into the corresponding input fields on the input form S S . The input fields use the same descriptions as those in the electronic source document. For example the phrase Box 1 Wages Tips and Other Compensation is on both the page and the input form . Hence the lower skilled data entry operator can easily input the correct numbers from the page into the corresponding input fields . Alternatively the OCR system scans the page and inserts the appropriate number into the corresponding input field on the input form . As shown in the numbers input are 80000 12000 4960 and 1162. The references may also assist the OCR system in identifying the number corresponding to the input field . In one embodiment one or more data entry operators and or one or more OCR systems may input information for a particular page for verifying the accuracy of the inputted numbers. The data entry operator and or the OCR system can move from one page of the electronic source document to another page of the electronic source document or from one electronic source document to another electronic source document. After data entry is complete and or verified the data entry operator may select a submit icon indicating to the tax preparer that the page of the electronic source document has been completed. The inputted information is then merged into the tax return.

Although exemplary embodiments of the invention has been shown and described many other changes combinations omissions modifications and substitutions in addition to those set forth in the above paragraphs may be made by one having skill in the art without necessarily departing from the spirit and scope of this invention. Accordingly the invention is not intended to be limited by the preferred embodiments but is to be defined by reference to the appended claims.

