---

title: Hybrid biologic-synthetic bioabsorbable scaffolds
abstract: A bioprosthetic device is provided for soft tissue attachment, reinforcement, and or reconstruction. The device comprises a naturally occurring extracellular matrix portion and a synthetic portion.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07569233&OS=07569233&RS=07569233
owner: DePuy Products, Inc.
number: 07569233
owner_city: Warsaw
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050420
---
This application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 567 886 filed May 4 2004 and U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60 571 766 filed May 17 2004. Both of these provisional patent applications are hereby incorporated by reference.

Cross reference is made to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 195 794 entitled Meniscus Regeneration Device and Method Ser. No. 10 195 719 entitled Devices from Naturally Occurring Biologically Derived Materials Ser. No. 10 195 347 entitled Cartilage Repair Apparatus and Method Ser. No. 10 195 344 entitled Unitary Surgical Device and Method Ser. No. 10 195 606 entitled Cartilage Repair and Regeneration Device and Method Ser. No. 10 195 354 entitled Porous Extracellular Matrix Scaffold and Method Ser. No. 10 195 334 entitled Cartilage Repair and Regeneration Scaffolds and Method and Ser. No. 10 195 633 entitled Porous Delivery Scaffold and Method each of which is assigned to the same assignee as the present application each of which was filed on Jul. 15 2002 and each of which is hereby incorporated by reference. Cross reference is also made to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 172 347 entitled Hybrid Biologic Synthetic Bioabsorbable Scaffolds which was filed on Jun. 14 2002 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 195 341 entitled Hybrid Biologic Synthetic Porous Extracellular Matrix Scaffolds which was filed on Jul. 15 2002 both of which are assigned to the same assignee as the present application and which are hereby incorporated by reference.

Cross reference is also made to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 110 532 entitled Hybrid Biologic Synthetic Bioabsorbable Scaffolds which was filed concurrently herewith is assigned to the same assignee as the present application is now abandoned and is hereby incorporated by reference.

The present invention relates to bioprosthetics and particularly to the use of bioprosthetics for the repair and replacement of connective tissue. More particularly the present invention relates to the use of a composite bioprosthetic device made up of a synthetic portion and heterologous animal tissue.

Currently there are multiple patents and publications which describe in detail the characteristics and properties of small intestine submucosa SIS . See for example U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 352 463 4 902 508 4 956 179 5 281 422 5 372 821 5 445 833 5 516 533 5 573 784 5 641 518 5 645 860 5 668 288 5 695 998 5 711 969 5 730 933 5 733 868 5 753 267 5 755 791 5 762 966 5 788 625 5 866 414 5 885 619 5 922 028 6 056 777 and WO 97 37613 incorporated herein by reference. SIS in various forms is commercially available from Cook Biotech Incorporated Bloomington Ind. . Further U.S. Pat. No. 4 400 833 to Kurland and PCT publication having International Publication Number WO 00 16822 provide information related to bioprosthetics and are also incorporated herein by reference.

It is also known to use naturally occurring extracellular matrices ECMs to provide a scaffold for tissue repair and regeneration. One such ECM is small intestine submucosa SIS . SIS has been used to repair support and stabilize a wide variety of anatomical defects and traumatic injuries. Commercially available SIS material is derived from porcine small intestinal submucosa that remodels the qualities of its host when implanted in human soft tissues. Further it is taught that the SIS material provides a natural matrix with a three dimensional microstructure and biochemical composition that facilitates host cell proliferation and supports tissue remodeling. SIS products such as Oasis material and Surgisis material are commercially available from Cook Biotech Bloomington Ind.

An SIS product referred to as RESTORE Orthobiologic Implant is available from DePuy Orthopaedics Inc. in Warsaw Indiana. The DePuy product is described for use during rotator cuff surgery and is provided as a resorbable framework that allows the rotator cuff tendon to regenerate itself. The RESTORE Implant is derived from porcine small intestine submucosa that has been cleaned disinfected and sterilized. Small intestine submucosa SIS has been described as a naturally occurring ECM composed primarily of collagenous proteins. Other biological molecules such as growth factors glycosaminoglycans etc. have also been identified in SIS. See Hodde et al. Tissue Eng. 2 3 209 217 1996 Voytik Harbin et al. J. Cell Biochem. 67 478 491 1997 McPherson and Badylak Tissue Eng. 4 1 75 83 1998 Hodde et al. Endothelium 8 1 11 24 2001 Hodde and Hiles Wounds 13 5 195 201 2001 Hurst and Bonner J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 12 11 1267 1279 2001 Hodde et al. Biomaterial 23 8 1841 1848 2002 and Hodde Tissue Eng. 8 2 295 308 2002 all of which are incorporated by reference herein. During seven years of preclinical testing in animals there were no incidences of infection transmission from the implant to the host and the SIS material has not decreased the systemic activity of the immune system. See Allman et al. Transplant 17 11 1631 1640 2001 Allman et al. Tissue Eng. 8 1 53 62 2002 .

While small intestine submucosa is available other sources of submucosa are known to be effective for tissue remodeling. These sources include but are not limited to stomach bladder alimentary respiratory or genital submucosa or liver basement membrane. See e.g. U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 379 710 6 171 344 6 099 567 and 5 554 389 hereby incorporated by reference. Further while SIS is most often porcine derived it is known that these various submucosa materials may be derived from non porcine sources including bovine and ovine sources. Additionally the ECM material may also include partial layers of laminar muscular is mucosa muscular is mucosoa lamina propria stratum compactum and or other tissue materials depending upon factors such as the source from which the ECM material was derived and the delamination procedure.

For the purposes of this invention it is within the definition of a naturally occurring ECM to clean delaminate and or comminute the ECM or even to cross link the collagen fibers within the ECM. It is also within the definition of naturally occurring ECM to fully or partially remove one or more sub components of the naturally occurring ECM. However it is not within the definition of a naturally occurring ECM to separate and purify the natural collagen or other components or sub components of the ECM and reform a matrix material from the purified natural collagen or other components or sub components of the ECM. While reference is made to SIS it is understood that other naturally occurring ECMs e.g. stomach bladder alimentary respiratory and genital submucosa and liver basement membrane whatever the source e.g. bovine porcine ovine are within the scope of this disclosure. Thus in this application the terms naturally occurring extracellular matrix or naturally occurring ECM are intended to refer to extracellular matrix material that has been cleaned disinfected sterilized and optionally cross linked. The terms naturally occurring extracellular matrix and naturally occurring ECM are also intended to include ECM foam material prepared as described in U.S. Patent Application No. 60 388 761 entitled Extracellular Matrix Scaffold and Method for Making the Same .

There are currently many ways in which various types of tissues such as ligaments and tendons for example are reinforced and or reconstructed. Suturing the tom or ruptured ends of the tissue is one method of attempting to restore function to the injured tissue. Sutures may also be reinforced through the use of synthetic non bioabsorbable or bioabsorbable materials. Autografting where tissue is taken from another site on the patient s body is another means of soft tissue reconstruction. Yet another means of repair or reconstruction can be achieved through allografting where tissue from a donor of the same species is used. Still another means of repair or reconstruction of soft tissue is through xenografting in which tissue from a donor of a different species is used.

According to the present invention a bioprosthetic device for soft tissue attachment reinforcement and or reconstruction is provided. The bioprosthetic device comprises SIS or other ECM formed to include a tissue layer and a synthetic portion coupled to the tissue layer. The tissue layer may also be dehydrated.

In one embodiment the SIS portion of the bioprosthetic device includes a top tissue layer of SIS material and a bottom tissue layer of SIS material coupled to the top tissue layer. The synthetic portion of the bioprosthetic device includes a row of fibers positioned to lie between the top and bottom tissue layers of the SIS portion. The fibers are positioned to lie in a spaced apart coplanar relation to one another along a length L of the SIS portion. The fibers are each formed to include a length L2 where L2 is longer than L so that an outer end portion of each fiber extends beyond the SIS portion in order to anchor the bioprosthetic device to the surrounding soft tissue.

Illustratively in another embodiment the synthetic reinforcing portion of the bioprosthetic device includes a mesh member formed to define the same length L as the SIS portion or may include a mesh member having a body portion coupled to the SIS portion and outer wing members coupled to the body portion and positioned to extend beyond the length L and a width W of the SIS portion in order to provide more material for anchoring the bioprosthetic device to the surrounding soft tissue.

The synthetic reinforcing portion of the device enhances the mechanical integrity of the construct in one for fiber reinforcements or two for fiber or mesh reinforcements dimensions. For the repair of tissues such as meniscal or articular cartilage or discs integrity in three dimensions is desirable for the implant to withstand the shear forces that will be present after implantation. Thus in one embodiment of the present application the absorbable synthetic portion of the device is in a three dimensional form to provide mechanical strength in three dimensions. The absorbable synthetic may be a fibrous nonwoven construct or a three dimensional woven mesh for example.

For the repair of certain other types of tissues such as tendons ligaments or fascia tissue infiltration and repair in three dimensions is desirable although three dimensional enhanced mechanical integrity of the implant is not necessary. Thus another embodiment of this invention is a composite device comprised of an SIS portion and an absorbable synthetic foam. The absorbable synthetic foam in one example is made of a biocompatible polymer that has a degradation profile that exceeds that of the SIS portion of the device. In this case the SIS portion of the device provides the initial suturability of the product and the synthetic foam provides an increased surface area in three dimensions for enhanced tissue infiltration. In a further embodiment that synthetic foam is made of 65 35 polyglycolic acid polycaprolactone or 60 40 polylactic acid polycaprolactone or a 50 50 mix of the two.

The ECM portion of the composite may be provided as a single hydrated sheet of SIS. Alternatively the single sheet of SIS is lyophilized freeze dried . Such a treatment renders increased porosity to the SIS sheet thereby enhancing it s capacity for allowing tissue ingrowth. Additionally this SIS portion may comprise multiple sheets of SIS that have been laminated together by mechanical pressure while hydrated. The laminated SIS assembly optionally further physically crosslinked by partially or fully drying down to less than 15 moisture content under vacuum pressure. Alternatively the laminated SIS assembly is lyophilized instead of being vacuum dried to increase its porosity. In still another embodiment the SIS sheet or laminate is perforated by mechanical means to create holes ranging for example from 1 mm to 1 cm. Another embodiment uses woven textiles of single or multi layer SIS strips that have been optionally vacuum dried or lyophilized to create meshes having different sized openings. The woven mesh SIS optionally is assembled while the SIS is still hydrated and then the whole assembly vacuum dried or lyophilized. Such a construct is suturable in the short term and has the advantage of having a very open structure for tissue ingrowth over time.

The three dimensional synthetic portion of the device is illustratively provided in the form of a fibrous nonwoven or foam material. The synthetic portion of the device preferably has interconnecting pores or voids to facilitate the transport of nutrients and or invasion of cells into the scaffold. The interconnected voids range in size for example from about 20 to 400 microns preferably 50 to 250 microns and constitute about 70 to 95 percent of the total volume of the construct. The range of the void size in the construct can be manipulated by changing process steps during construct fabrication. The foam optionally may be formed around a reinforcing material for example a knitted mesh.

The synthetic reinforcing portion of the device is made of a fibrous matrix made for example of threads yarns nets laces felts and nonwovens. An illustrated method of combining the bioabsorbable fibrous materials e.g. fibers to make the fibrous matrix for use in devices of the present invention is known to one skilled in the art as the wet lay process of forming nonwovens. The wet lay method has been described in Nonwoven Textiles by Radko Krcma Textile Trade Press Manchester England 1967 pages 175 176.

Alternatively the synthetic reinforcing portion of the device is made of a three dimensional mesh or textile. A preferred method of combining the bioabsorbable fibrous materials e.g. fibers to make the fibrous matrix for use in devices of the present invention is known to one skilled in the art as three dimensional weaving or knitting. The three dimensional weaving knitting or braiding method has been described by several groups who have used the constructs for tissue engineering applications including Chen et al. in Collagen Hybridization with Poly 1 Lactic Acid Braid Promotes Ligament Cell Migration Mater. Sci. Eng. C 17 1 2 95 99 2001 and Bercovy et al. in Carbon PLGA Prostheses for Ligament Reconstruction Experimental Basis and Short Term Results in Man Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 196 159 68 1985 . Such a three dimensional material can provide both reinforcement and three dimensional form.

The synthetic reinforcing portion of the tissue implant of the present invention may include textiles with woven knitted warped knitted i.e. lace like nonwoven and braided structures. In an exemplary embodiment the reinforcing component has a mesh like structure. However in any of the above structures mechanical properties of the material can be altered by changing the density or texture of the material. The fibers used to make the reinforcing component can be for example monofilaments yarns threads braids or bundles of fibers. These fibers can be made of any biocompatible material including bioabsorbable materials such as polylactic acid PLA polyglycolic acid PGA polycaprolactone PCL polydioxanone PDO trimethylene carbonate TMC polyvinyl alcohol PVA copolymers or blends thereof. In an exemplary embodiment the fibers that comprise the nonwoven or three dimensional mesh are formed of a polylactic acid and polyglycolic acid copolymer at a 95 5 mole ratio.

The ECM and the synthetic three dimensional portion are provided in layers. It is understood for the purposes of this invention that the term coupled to describes a relationship wherein a surface of one layer is in contact with a surface of another layer and the two surfaces are connected through mechanical or chemical means such as through lamination crosslinking diffusion of the material of one layer into interstices of the adjacent layer stitching and the like. Sandwiched between describes a relationship wherein a middle layer has a first surface in contact with a surface of an adjacent layer and a second opposite facing surface in contact with a surface of a second adjacent layer. Again it is understood that the sandwiched layers are connected through mechanical or chemical means. The synthetic reinforcing portion may be provided as individual fibers or as layers. The synthetic reinforcing portion may be imbedded within a foam layer provided between two other layers that are otherwise coupled together or may form a layer that is coupled to one or more adjacent layers.

It is anticipated that the devices of the present invention can be combined with one or more bioactive agents in addition to those already present in naturally occurring ECM one or more biologically derived agents or substances one or more cell types one or more biological lubricants one or more biocompatible inorganic materials one or more biocompatible synthetic polymers and one or more biopolymers. Moreover the devices of the present invention can be combined with devices containing such materials.

 Bioactive agents include one or more of the following chemotactic agents therapeutic agents e.g. antibiotics steroidal and non steroidal analgesics and anti inflammatories anti rejection agents such as immunosuppressants and anti cancer drugs various proteins e.g. short chain peptides bone morphogenic proteins glycoprotein and lipoprotein cell attachment mediators biologically active ligands integrin binding sequence ligands various growth and or differentiation agents e.g. epidermal growth factor IGF I IGF II TGF I III growth and differentiation factors vascular endothelial growth factors fibroblast growth factors platelet derived growth factors insulin derived growth factor and transforming growth factors parathyroid hormone parathyroid hormone related peptide bFGF TGF superfamily factors BMP 2 BMP 4 BMP 6 BMP 12 sonic hedgehog GDF5 GDF6 GDF8 PDGF small molecules that affect the upregulation of specific growth factors tenascin C hyaluronic acid chondroitin sulfate fibronectin decorin thromboelastin thrombin derived peptides heparin binding domains heparin heparan sulfate DNA fragments and DNA plasmids. If other such substances have therapeutic value in the orthopaedic field it is anticipated that at least some of these substances will have use in the present invention and such substances should be included in the meaning of bioactive agent and bioactive agents unless expressly limited otherwise.

 Biologically derived agents include one or more of the following bone autograft allograft and xenograft and derivates of bone cartilage autograft allograft and xenograft including for example meniscal tissue and derivatives ligament autograft allograft and xenograft and derivatives derivatives of intestinal tissue autograft allograft and xenograft including for example submucosa derivatives of stomach tissue autograft allograft and xenograft including for example submucosa derivatives of bladder tissue autograft allograft and xenograft including for example submucosa derivatives of alimentary tissue autograft allograft and xenograft including for example submucosa derivatives of respiratory tissue autograft allograft and xenograft including for example submucosa derivatives of genital tissue autograft allograft and xenograft including for example submucosa derivatives of liver tissue autograft allograft and xenograft including for example liver basement membrane derivatives of skin tissue platelet rich plasma PRP platelet poor plasma bone marrow aspirate demineralized bone matrix insulin derived growth factor whole blood fibrin and blood clot. Purified ECM and other collagen sources are also intended to be included within biologically derived agents. If other such substances have therapeutic value in the orthopaedic field it is anticipated that at least some of these substances will have use in the present invention and such substances should be included in the meaning of biologically derived agent and biologically derived agents unless expressly limited otherwise.

 Biologically derived agents also include bioremodelable collageneous tissue matrices. The expressions bioremodelable collagenous tissue matrix and naturally occurring bioremodelable collageneous tissue matrix include matrices derived from native tissue selected from the group consisting of skin artery vein pericardium heart valve dura mater ligament bone cartilage bladder liver stomach fascia and intestine tendon whatever the source. Although naturally occurring bioremodelable collageneous tissue matrix is intended to refer to matrix material that has been cleaned processed sterilized and optionally crosslinked it is not within the definition of a naturally occurring bioremodelable collageneous tissue matrix to purify the natural fibers and reform a matrix material from purified natural fibers. The term bioremodelable collageneous tissue matrices includes extracellular matrices within its definition.

 Cells include one or more of the following chondrocytes fibrochondrocytes osteocytes osteoblasts osteoclasts synoviocytes bone marrow cells mesenchymal cells stromal cells stem cells embryonic stem cells precursor cells derived from adipose tissue peripheral blood progenitor cells stem cells isolated from adult tissue genetically transformed cells a combination of chondrocytes and other cells a combination of osteocytes and other cells a combination of synoviocytes and other cells a combination of bone marrow cells and other cells a combination of mesenchymal cells and other cells a combination of stromal cells and other cells a combination of stem cells and other cells a combination of embryonic stem cells and other cells a combination of precursor cells isolated from adult tissue and other cells a combination of peripheral blood progenitor cells and other cells a combination of stem cells isolated from adult tissue and other cells and a combination of genetically transformed cells and other cells. If other cells are found to have therapeutic value in the orthopaedic field it is anticipated that at least some of these cells will have use in the present invention and such cells should be included within the meaning of cell and cells unless expressly limited otherwise. Illustratively in one example of embodiments that are to be seeded with living cells such as chondrocytes a sterilized implant may be subsequently seeded with living cells and packaged in an appropriate medium for the cell type used. For example a cell culture medium comprising Dulbecco s Modified Eagles Medium DMEM can be used with standard additives such as non essential amino acids glucose ascorbic acid sodium pyrovate fungicides antibiotics etc. in concentrations deemed appropriate for cell type shipping conditions etc.

 Biological lubricants include hyaluronic acid and its salts such as sodium hyaluronate glycosaminoglycans such as dermatan sulfate heparan sulfate chondroiton sulfate and keratan sulfate synovial fluid and components of synovial fluid including mucinous glycoproteins e.g. lubricin tribonectins articular cartilage superficial zone proteins surface active phospholipids lubricating glycoproteins I II vitronectin and rooster comb hyaluronate. Biological lubricant is also intended to include commercial products such as ARTHREASE high molecular weight sodium hyaluronate available in Europe from DePuy International Ltd. of Leeds England and manufactured by Bio Technology General Israel Ltd. of Rehovot Israel SYNVISC Hylan G F 20 manufactured by Biomatrix Inc. of Ridgefield N.J. and distributed by Wyeth Ayerst Pharmaceuticals of Philadelphia Pa. HYLAGAN sodium hyaluronate available from Sanofi Synthelabo Inc. of New York N.Y. manufactured by FIDIA S.p.A. of Padua Italy and HEALON sodium hyaluronate available from Pharmacia Corporation of Peapack N.J. in concentrations of 1 1.4 and 2.3 for opthalmologic uses . If other such substances have therapeutic value in the orthopaedic field it is anticipated that at least some of these substances will have use in the present invention and such substances should be included in the meaning of biological lubricant and biological lubricants unless expressly limited otherwise.

 Biocompatible polymers is intended to include both synthetic polymers and biopolymers e.g. collagen . Examples of biocompatible polymers include polyesters of alpha hydroxycarboxylic acids such as poly L lactide PLLA and polyglycolide PGA poly p dioxanone PDO polycaprolactone PCL polyvinyl alcohol PVA polyethylene oxide PEO polymers disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 333 029 and 6 355 699 and any other bioresorbable and biocompatible polymer co polymer or mixture of polymers or co polymers that are utilized in the construction of prosthetic implants. In addition as new biocompatible bioresorbable materials are developed it is expected that at least some of them will be useful materials from which orthopaedic devices may be made. It should be understood that the above materials are identified by way of example only and the present invention is not limited to any particular material unless expressly called for in the claims.

 Biocompatible inorganic materials include materials such as hydroxyapatite all calcium phosphates alpha tricalcium phosphate beta tricalcium phosphate calcium carbonate barium carbonate calcium sulfate barium sulfate polymorphs of calcium phosphate sintered and non sintered ceramic particles and combinations of such materials. If other such substances have therapeutic value in the orthopaedic field it is anticipated that at least some of these substances will have use in the present invention and such substances should be included in the meaning of biocompatible inorganic material and biocompatible inorganic materials unless expressly limited otherwise.

It is expected that various combinations of bioactive agents biologically derived agents cells biological lubricants biocompatible inorganic materials biocompatible polymers can be used with the devices of the present invention.

Thus in one aspect of this invention a bioprosthetic device is provided comprising a layer of ECM material having a first surface and a three dimensional synthetic portion having a first surface wherein the first surface of the ECM layer is coupled to the first surface of the three dimensional synthetic portion. The three dimensional synthetic portion may be a fibrous material illustratively selected from the group consisting of mesh textile and felt. Alternatively the three dimensional synthetic portion may be a synthetic foam.

In another aspect of this invention a prosthetic device is provided comprising one or more layers of bioremodelable collageneous tissue matrices material coupled to one or more three dimensional synthetic bodies to provide a three dimensional composite for tissue attachment reinforcement or reconstruction.

In yet another aspect of this invention a method for making a bioprosthetic device is provided the method comprising the steps of providing a layer of ECM material having a first surface placing a polymer solution in contact the first surface of the ECM material to make an assembly wherein the polymer is selected to form a foam upon lyophilization and lyophilizing the assembly.

Additional features of the present invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art upon consideration of the following description of preferred embodiments of the invention exemplifying the best mode of carrying out the invention as presently perceived.

A composite bioprosthetic device as shown in is provided for the purposes of soft tissue attachment reinforcement and or reconstruction. Bioprosthetic device includes a small intestinal submucosa SIS portion and a synthetic portion . SIS portion is provided to be absorbed into the body and replaced by host tissue. SIS portion acts as a scaffold for tissue ingrowth and remodeling. Synthetic portion of bioprosthetic device provides additional initial mechanical strength to bioprosthetic device . Because device includes SIS portion and synthetic portion bioprosthetic device is provided with a differential in biodegradation and bioremodeling rates. Synthetic portion for example can be configured to degrade at a slower rate than SIS portion . Further synthetic portion may act as an anchor to couple bioprosthetic device to the surrounding soft tissue not shown during surgery. Alternatively the SIS portion may be sutured to couple the bioprosthetic device to the surrounding tissue.

SIS portion of bioprosthetic device as shown in includes a top tissue layer and a bottom tissue layer coupled to top tissue layer mechanically or through a dehydration process. Although top and bottom tissue layers are provided in bioprosthetic device shown in it is within the scope of this disclosure as will be described in more detail later to include SIS portions having any number of tissue layers. It is also included within the scope of this disclosure to provide perforated tissue layers or any other physical configuration of SIS. See for example. Further it is within the scope of this disclosure to define top and bottom tissue layers as including multiple tissue layers each. In preferred embodiments for example top and bottom tissue layers each include three to four layers of SIS tissue. SIS portion further includes a first end a second end spaced apart from first end and sides coupled to and positioned to lie between first and second ends . A length L is defined as the distance between first end and second end and a width W is defined as the distance between sides .

Synthetic portion of bioprosthetic device includes row of four fibers as shown in . It is within the scope of the disclosure to define fibers to include fibers or any fibrous material. Fibers are positioned to lie along length L between top and bottom tissue layers and are further positioned to lie in coplanar relation to one another. When making bioprosthetic device fibers of synthetic portion are placed between top and bottom tissue layers prior to dehydration. Although row of four fibers is provided in bioprosthetic device shown in it is within the scope of this disclosure to include synthetic portions formed to include any number of rows having any number of fibers . It is further within the scope of this disclosure to include fibers made from bioabsorbable and non bioabsorbable materials. For example it is within the scope of this disclosure to include fibers made from polylactic acid PLA or polyglycolic PGA acid a combination of the two Panacryl absorbable suture Ethicon Inc Somerville N.J. other bioabsorbable materials nylon polyethylene Kevlar Dacron PTFE carbon fiber or other non bioabsorbable materials.

As shown in each fiber of bioprosthetic device includes two outer end portions a middle portion coupled to and positioned to lie between outer end portions . Middle portion is positioned to lie between top tissue layer and bottom tissue layer of SIS portion . Middle portion of fibers helps to provide strength along length L of bioprosthetic device . One or more outer end portions of fibers can be used for anchoring bioprosthetic device to surrounding soft tissue not shown . The combination of SIS portion and fibers further provide bioprosthetic device with differential biodegradation rates. For example fibers of synthetic portion can be made to be non bioabsorbable or can be made with material which absorbs into the body at a slower rate than SIS portion . Uses for bioprosthetic device shown in include but are not limited to ligament or tendon repair.

An alternate bioprosthetic device is shown in . Bioprosthetic device include an alternate SIS portion of having top tissue layer bottom tissue layer and two middle tissue layers . Top bottom and middle tissue layers include one or more layers of SIS tissue each. SIS portion similar to SIS portion also includes a first end a second end spaced apart from first end and sides . Bioprosthetic device further includes an alternate synthetic portion having three rows of four fibers . One row is positioned to lie between top tissue layer and one of the middle tissue layers . Another row is positioned to lie between the two middle tissue layers and the final row of fibers is positioned to lie between another one of the middle tissue layers and bottom tissue layer as shown in . Fibers of bioprosthetic device similar to fibers of bioprosthetic device are positioned to lie along length L of SIS portion .

Although fibers of bioprosthetic devices are positioned to lie along length L of each respective SIS portion it is within the scope of this disclosure to include a synthetic portion of an alternate bioprosthetic device as shown in having multi directional fibers positioned to lie along a length L of an SIS portion and along width W of SIS portion . Synthetic portion of bioprosthetic device includes a first row having seventeen fibers positioned to lie along length L of SIS portion . Synthetic portion further includes a second row having eighteen fibers positioned to lie along width W of SIS portion so that the fibers of first row and second row are positioned to lie orthogonally with respect to each other. Although rows and are positioned to lie in orthogonal relation to one another it is within the scope of this disclosure to include synthetic portion having first and second rows and which lie at any angular relation to one another. It is also within the scope of this disclosure to include rows and each having any number of fibers .

Similar to bioprosthetic device shown in bioprosthetic device includes a top tissue layer a bottom tissue layer and two middle tissue layers positioned to lie between top and bottom tissue layers . As mentioned before top bottom and middle tissue layers are each formed to include one or more layers of SIS tissue. Although SIS portion of bioprosthetic device is shown to include four tissue layers it is within the scope of the disclosure to include bioprosthetic device having any number of tissue layers. As shown in first row is positioned to lie between top tissue layer and one of the two middle tissue layers positioned to lie adjacent to top tissue layer . Second row is positioned to lie between the other middle tissue layer and bottom tissue layer . It is within the scope of this disclosure however to include rows positioned to lie between any tissue layer of device .

Yet another bioprosthetic device is shown in . Bioprosthetic device is similar to devices and and includes an SIS portion having a top tissue layer a bottom tissue layer and a middle tissue layer positioned to lie between top and bottom tissue layers . Top bottom and middle tissue layers each include one or more layers of SIS tissue. Bioprosthetic device further includes a synthetic portion including first mesh member and second mesh member . It is within the scope of this disclosure to include any type of synthetic mesh member. For example bioabsorbable and or non bioabsorbable mesh members made of either woven or nonwoven PGA and or PLA mixtures are included within the scope of disclosure of this invention. First mesh member is coupled to and positioned to lie between top tissue layer and middle tissue layer and second mesh member is coupled to and positioned to lie between middle tissue layer and bottom tissue layer as shown in . Each of the first and second mesh members has a length L and a width W approximately equal to length L and width W of tissue layers of SIS portion . It is understood that in some embodiments it may be preferable for the mesh to be slightly smaller than the SIS portion.

In second mesh member is shown partially coated in comminuted SIS . Comminuted SIS may be used to fill the interstices of second mesh member to provide a stronger device. Other means for reinforcing bioprosthetic device may be employed including suturing or tacking the various layers together. Further while comminuted SIS is discussed with respect to the embodiment shown in it is understood that comminuted SIS may be used to coat the mesh or fibers for any embodiment.

Another embodiment of the present invention includes a bioprosthetic device having a synthetic portion including a mesh member as shown in . Similar to the previously mentioned devices bioprosthetic device includes an SIS portion having a top tissue layer and a bottom tissue layer coupled to top tissue layer . Top and bottom tissue layers each include one or more layers of SIS tissue. Mesh member includes a central body portion not shown and outer wing portions as shown in . Outer wing portions are extensions of the central body portion. Although four outer wing portions are shown in it is within the scope of this disclosure to include a mesh member having a body portion and any number of wing portions coupled to the body portion. The central body portion of mesh member is formed to include a length and a width equal to length L and width W of SIS portion . The central body portion is coupled to and positioned to lie between top tissue layer and bottom tissue layer of SIS portion . Each wing portion is coupled to the central body portion of mesh member and is positioned to extend beyond the length L and width W of SIS portion as shown in . As mentioned before outer wing portions are extensions of the central body portion. Wing portions provide additional material for anchoring bioprosthetic device to the surrounding soft tissue. Because outer wing portions extend beyond central body portion of mesh member mesh member has a length and a width greater than length L and width W of SIS portion .

Yet another embodiment of the present invention is shown in showing a bioprosthetic device similar to bioprosthetic device described above. Bioprosthetic device includes an SIS portion and a synthetic portion coupled to SIS portion . SIS portion includes a top tissue layer which is circular in shape and a bottom tissue layer which is also circular in shape. Each of the top and bottom tissue layers include one or more layers of SIS tissue. Top and bottom tissue layers each have a diameter D. The synthetic portion of bioprosthetic device includes a mesh member coupled to and positioned to lie between top and bottom tissue layers . Mesh member is circular in shape and has a diameter D which is greater than diameter D of synthetic portion . Therefore as shown in an outer rim portion of mesh member is provided. Similar to outer wing portions of bioprosthetic device shown in outer rim portion of bioprosthetic device provides additional material for anchoring bioprosthetic device to the surrounding soft tissue during surgery.

Synthetic reinforcing material illustratively comprises a two dimensional fibrous matrix construct as shown in and may have the same length and width as the SIS layer as shown in may be slightly smaller or may extend beyond the ends of the SIS layer as shown in . Alternatively synthetic reinforcing material may comprise a three dimensional mesh textile felt or other fibrous nonwoven construct which may be shaped or formed for the particular application. The fibers comprise any biocompatible material including PLA PGA PCL PDO TMC PVA or copolymers or blends thereof. In one example mesh material is a 95 5 copolymer of PLA PGA.

Three dimensional synthetic portion is a nonwoven material prepared to have numerous interconnecting pores or voids . Illustratively the size of the voids may range from 20 to 400 microns. However the size of the voids may be adjusted depending on the application and the size may be manipulated by changing process steps during construction by altering freezing temperature rate of temperature change and vacuum profile. Examples of various polymers that may be used for the foam as well as various lyophilization profiles to control porosity are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 6 333 029 and 6 355 699 hereby incorporated by reference. Optionally three dimensional synthetic portion further comprises a synthetic reinforcing layer embedded within the foam. Reinforcing layer illustratively provides enhanced mechanical integrity to the three dimensional synthetic portion. In an illustrated embodiment a Vicryl knitted mesh is used. However other reinforcing layers may be used.

Optionally three dimensional synthetic portion may be a hybrid ECM synthetic foam portion. In making such a foam the polymer solution is mixed with a slurry of comminuted SIS prior to lyophilization. See U.S. Application No. 60 388 761 entitled Extracellular Matrix Scaffold and Method for Making the Same hereby incorporated by reference.

Reinforced SIS devices may also be fabricated using other processes. For example a synthetic polymer mesh coated with comminuted SIS or other ECM may be sandwiched in the middle of twenty strips of SIS 10 layers on each side laminated under high pressure and subsequently dried under vacuum pressure in a flat bed gel drier system. The comminuted SIS or other comminuted ECM may be prepared in the manner described in U.S. patent application Publication No. 20030044444 A1 entitled Porous Extracellular Matrix Scaffold and Method by P. Malaviya et al. the entirety of which is hereby incorporated by reference.

Such a laminated and dried implant is significantly more resistant to delamination 175 minutes to delaminate using a water bath delamination protocol described below as compared to implants made either with high pressure lamination but without the comminuted SIS coating 60 minutes to delaminate or with the comminuted SIS coating but without the high pressure lamination 20 30 minutes to delaminate . It is believed that coating the synthetic mesh with comminuted SIS and then initiating lamination under high pressure has a synergistic effect on the resistance to delamination.

Such relatively high positive pressure may be applied in a number of different manners. In an exemplary implementation the relatively high positive pressure is applied by use of a pneumatic cylinder press assembly. Other positive pressure sources may also be used. Moreover the pressure may be applied in a wide range of magnitudes.

Implants fabricated in such a manner may have higher and perhaps significantly higher mechanical properties. In specific exemplary uses such implants may be used where diseased damaged tissue needs to be regenerated under high load conditions. For example such implants may be used for the augmentation of damaged resected hip capsule following primary or revision hip surgery for patellar tendon regeneration for the repair of large rotator cuff tears for spinal ligament regeneration and the like.

Other methods for fabricating reinforced SIS implants are also contemplated. For example the surface of the synthetic polymer is characteristically hydrophobic in nature while the SIS surface is hydrophilic. The surface of the synthetic polymer component may be modified to render it more hydrophilic and as a result more compatible with the SIS surface. The more hydrophilic polymer surface creates a like like attraction e.g. weak force and hydrogen bonding between the synthetic polymer component and the SIS thereby reducing the occurrences of delamination of the device. Such modification of the surface of the polymer component may also be used in conjunction with concepts described above for fabricating a pressure laminated and vacuum dehydrated composite.

Surface modification of the synthetic polymer component such as a resorbable polyester may be accomplished by numerous techniques such as for example traditional wet chemistry or gas plasma processing. Traditional chemistries may include surface hydrolysis and amidation techniques. Base or acid catalyzed hydrolysis of the synthetic polymer e.g. polyester creates pendant hydroxyl and carboxylic acid moieties while treatment with a bifunctional amine affords free amine functionalities coupled to the surface. It should be appreciated that such a bifunctional amine may have an amine on both ends thereof or alternatively may have an amine on one end with any type of hydrophilic group on the other end.

Gas plasma treatment of the synthetic polymer generates high energy reactive species that bond to surfaces. For example treatment of a polymer surface with ammonia plasma generates an amine functionalized surface. Similarly an oxidative plasma may be produced by filtering aqueous hydrogen peroxide into the plasma chamber at approximately 400 mTorr and applying an approximately 200 Watt radio frequency for approximately 3 5 or 10 minutes.

It should be appreciated that such treatment of the synthetic polymer may also be used to functionalize non absorbable polymers.

By taking these approaches to strengthen SIS laminates crosslinking of the SIS material may be avoided thus retaining more of its biochemical and biological properties. However to fit the needs of a given implant design crosslinking of the SIS material may be used in conjunction with the herein described strengthening techniques.

The composite implants described herein may be used where diseased or damaged tissue needs to be regenerated under high load conditions for example for the augmentation of damaged resected hip capsule following primary or revision hip surgery for patellar or Achilles tendon regeneration for the repair of large rotator cuff tears for spinal ligament regeneration etcetera.

It should be appreciated that devices may be fabricated which include a combination of both surface treatment and coating of the synthetic polymer component. For example the synthetic polymer component may first be treated to enhance the hydrophilicity of it surface e.g. by use of wet chemistry or gas plasma treatment . Once treated the synthetic polymer component may be coated in comminuted SIS or other naturally occurring extracellular matrix material in the manner described above. Thereafter the synthetic polymer component may be secured to layers of SIS or other ECM . For example the treated and coated synthetic polymer layer may be laminated to one or more SIS layers under high pressure and subsequently dried under vacuum pressure in the manner described above.

While the devices shown in specific embodiments it is understood that other arrangements are within the scope of this invention. For example in an SIS layer is sandwiched between two three dimensional foam sections with or without a reinforcing material embedded within the foam. Additional reinforcing layers as shown in may be used with these embodiments. Similarly when a single three dimensional foam portion is sandwiched between two SIS layers as in a layer of reinforcing material may be used depending upon the application. In still another embodiment the reinforcing portion may comprise a three dimensional mesh or textile and the three dimensional foam portion may be omitted. It is also within the scope of this disclosure to further define the SIS portion to include sheets perforated sheets or any other physical configuration of SIS. Furthermore the synthetic portion may comprise Prolene Ethicon Inc Somerville N.J. meshes and or sutures Vicryl Ethicon Inc Somerville N.J. meshes and or sutures Mersilene Ethicon Inc Somerville N.J. meshes PDS II Ethicon Inc. Somerville N.J. meshes or sutures Panacryl Ethicon Inc. Somerville N.J. meshes or sutures and Monocryl meshes or sutures for example. Additional two or three dimensional meshes may be constructed for particular applications. Further it is within the scope of this disclosure to include bioprosthetic devices where the SIS portion includes any number of tissue layers and where multiple tissue layers are positioned to lie along each synthetic layer. The SIS layers may be dehydrated prior to or subsequent to assembly of the device. Further any shape and or orientation of the SIS portion and the synthetic portion of the bioprosthetic device is within the scope of this disclosure are merely examples of various embodiments of the present invention.

Sheets of clean disinfected porcine SIS material were obtained as described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 902 508 and 4 956 178. Ten strips 3.5 inches wide and 6 inches long were cut. The strips were hydrated by placing in RO water at room temperature for 5 minutes.

To assemble the implant five SIS strips were placed on top of each other while ensuring no air bubbles were trapped between the strips. A knitted Panacryl mesh 2 inches wide and 5 inches long was placed centrally on the 5 layer thick SIS strip. The mesh had been pretreated to remove any traces of oil or other contaminants due to handling. This was done by a series of rinses each 2 minutes long in 100 90 80 70 ethanol 200 proof in RO water followed by a final 5 minute in RO water. Subsequently a second 5 layer thick strip of SIS was assembled and placed to sandwich the mesh between the two SIS strips.

The implant was dried under vacuum pressure using a gel drier system Model FB GD 45 Fisher Scientific Pittsburgh Pa. for 3 hours. The gel drier bed temperature was set at 30 C. for the procedure. This drying procedure results in squeezing out of the bulk water in the implant and also reduces the amount of bound water within the tissue resulting in a final moisture of between 7 8 . This process also results in a physical crosslinking between the laminates of SIS and between the mesh and adjacent SIS laminates.

Non reinforced SIS strips were made in the same way as described except that no mesh material was placed between the strips of SIS.

This example describes the preparation of three dimensional composite tissue implants incorporating a biodegradable SIS laminated sheet a synthetic reinforcement in the form of a biodegradable mesh and a synthetic degradable foam.

A solution of the polymer to be lyophilized to form the foam component was prepared in a four step process. A 95 5 weight ratio solution of 1 4 dioxane 40 60 PCL PLA was made and poured into a flask. The flask was placed in a water bath stirring at 60 70 C. for 5 hrs. The solution was filtered using an extraction thimble extra coarse porosity type ASTM 170 220 EC and stored in flasks.

A three dimensional mesh material composed of a 95 5 copolymer of polylactic polyglycolic acid PLA PGA knitted mesh was rendered flat to control curling by using a compression molder at 80 C. for 2 min. After preparing the mesh 0.8 mm metal shims were placed at each end of a 4 4 inch aluminum mold and the mesh was sized to fit the mold. The synthetic mesh was then laid into the mold covering both shims. Next an SIS laminated sheet was placed over the mesh followed by additional shims to cover the edges of the SIS and synthetic mesh.

The polymer solution 40 60 PCL PLA was added into mold such that the solution covered the sheet of SIS as well as the mesh and reached a level of 3.0 mm in the mold.

The mold assembly then was placed on the shelf of the lyophilizer Virtis Gardiner N.Y. and the freeze dry sequence begun. The freeze dry sequence used in this example was 1 17 C. for 60 minutes 2 5 C. for 60 minutes under vacuum of 100 mT 3 5 C. for 60 minutes under vacuum of 20 mT 4 20 C. for 60 minutes under vacuum of 20 mT.

After the cycle was completed the mold assembly was taken out of the freeze drier and allowed to degas in a vacuum hood for 2 to 3 hours and stored under nitrogen.

The resultant bioprosthetic device has a structure as illustrated in . The three dimensional mesh provides both mechanical strength and three dimensional structure to the resultant device. The foam may be shaped or sculpted for the particular application and the mesh SIS layers may be trimmed to fit. It is also understood that the mold could be provided in the desired shape reducing or obviating the need for sculpting or trimming.

This example uses the process outlined in Example 2 to fabricate a biodegradable composite scaffold of the present invention where the foam component is a 65 35 PGA PCL copolymer.

This example uses the process outlined in Example 2 to fabricate a biodegradable composite scaffold of the present invention where the synthetic knitted mesh component is composed of 100 PDO.

This example uses the process outlined in Example 2 to fabricate a biodegradable composite scaffold of the present invention where in place of a three dimensional mesh the synthetic component is a nonwoven fibrous structure composed of either 100 PDO 100 90 10 PGA PLA or a combination of the two.

This example uses the process outlined in Example 2 to fabricate a biodegradable composite scaffold of the present invention where the SIS component is soaked overnight in the polymer solution 5 wt 60 40 PLA PCL in dioxane prior to placement over the synthetic mesh. Enhanced lamination between the components was found when this additional soaking step was added to the process as evidenced by a composite with a greater degree of handlability.

This example uses the process outlined in Example 2 to fabricate a biodegradable composite scaffold of the present invention where the SIS component is a single layer sheet rather than a laminated sheet.

This example uses the process outlined in Example 2 to fabricate a biodegradable composite scaffold of the present invention where the SIS laminated sheet is perforated with holes ranging from 1 mm 1 cm. These perforations allow for enhanced penetration of the polymer solution through the SIS sheet.

This example uses the process outlined in Example 2 to fabricate a biodegradable composite scaffold of the present invention where the SIS reinforcing component is a woven mesh of laminated strips sandwiched between two layers of 60 40 PLA PCL foam. shows such a woven mesh. wherein the SIS layer is a woven mesh of illustrates the construct of this Example.

A soaking test was performed to test resistance to delamination. Implants made as specified in Example 1 both reinforced and non reinforced were cut into several strips 1 cm wide by 5 cm long using a 10 scalpel blade. The strips were immersed in RO water at room temperature for 1 2 5 10 20 30 or 60 minutes. Delamination was detected at the edges of the implants by direct visual observation. All implants showed obvious signs of delamination at 1 hour. In non reinforced implants delamination was first visually observed between 40 60 minutes whereas in the reinforced samples delamination was apparent between 20 30 minutes.

This example illustrates the enhanced mechanical properties of a construct reinforced with absorbable mesh. Preparation of three dimensional elastomeric tissue implants with and without a reinforcement in the form of a biodegradable mesh are described. While a foam is used for the elastomeric tissue in this example it is expected that similar results will be achieved with an ECM and a biodegradable mesh.

A solution of the polymer to be lyophilized to form the foam component was prepared in a four step process. A 95 5 weight ratio solution of 1 4 dioxane 40 60 PCL PLA was made and poured into a flask. The flask was placed in a water bath stirring at 70 C. for 5 hrs. The solution was filtered using an extraction thimble extra coarse porosity type ASTM 170 220 EC and stored in flasks.

Reinforcing mesh materials formed of a 90 10 copolymer of polyglycolic polylactic acid PGA PLA knitted Code VKM M and woven Code VWM M both sold under the tradename VICRYL were rendered flat by ironing using a compression molder at 80 C. 2 min. After preparing the meshes 0.8 mm shims were placed at each end of a 15.3 15.3 cm aluminum mold and the mesh was sized 14.2 mm to fit the mold. The mesh was then laid into the mold covering both shims. A clamping block was then placed on the top of the mesh and the shim such that the block was clamped properly to ensure that the mesh had a uniform height in the mold. Another clamping block was then placed at the other end slightly stretching the mesh to keep it even and flat.

As the polymer solution was added to the mold the mold was tilted to about a 5 degree angle so that one of the non clamping sides was higher than the other. Approximately 60 ml of the polymer solution was slowly transferred into the mold ensuring that the solution was well dispersed in the mold. The mold was then placed on a shelf in a Virtis Gardiner N.Y. Freeze Mobile G freeze dryer. The following freeze drying sequence was used 1 20 C. for 15 minutes 2 5 C. for 120 minutes 3 5 C. for 90 minutes under vacuum 100 milliTorr 4 5 C. for 90 minutes under vacuum 100 milliTorr 5 20 C. for 90 minutes under vacuum 100 milliTorr. The mold assembly was then removed from the freezer and placed in a nitrogen box overnight. Following the completion of this process the resulting implant was carefully peeled out of the mold in the form of a foam mesh sheet.

Nonreinforced foams were also fabricated. To obtain non reinforced foams however the steps regarding the insertion of the mesh into the mold were not performed. The lyophilization steps above were followed.

Lyophilized 40 60 polycaprolactone polylactic acid PCL PLA foam as well as the same foam reinforced with an embedded VICRYL knitted mesh were fabricated as described in Example 3. These reinforced implants were tested for suture pull out strength and compared to non reinforced foam prepared following the procedure of Example 11.

For the suture pull out strength test the dimensions of the specimens were approximately 5 cm 9 cm. Specimens were tested for pull out strength in the wale direction of the mesh knitting machine axis . A size 0 polypropylene monofilament suture Code 8834H sold under the tradename PROLENE by Ethicon Inc. Somerville N.J. was passed through the mesh 6.25 mm from the edge of the specimens. The ends of the suture were clamped into the upper jaw and the mesh or the reinforced foam was clamped into the lower jaw of an Instron model 4501 Canton Mass. . The Instron machine with a 20 lb load cell was activated using a cross head speed of 2.54 cm per minute. The ends of the suture were pulled at a constant rate until failure occurred. The peak load lbs. experienced during the pulling was recorded.

These data show that a reinforced foam has improved pull out strength verses either foam or mesh alone.

Sheets of clean disinfected porcine SIS material were obtained as described in patents U.S. Pat. Nos. 4 902 508 and 4 956 178. Twenty strips 3.5 inches wide and 6 inches long were cut. The strips were hydrated by placing in RO water at room temperature for 5 minutes.

To assemble the implant ten SIS strips were placed longitudinally on top of each other while ensuring no air bubbles were trapped between the strips. A knitted Panacryl mesh 2 inches wide and 5 inches long was immersed in a comminuted SIS suspension disclosed in U.S. patent publication 2003004444 A1 approximately 1 solids w v . This results in a near uniform coating of the synthetic mesh with the wet fibers of the SIS suspension such that the SIS fibers are intertwined and interlocked with the porous knitted mesh. The coated mesh was placed centrally on the 10 layer thick SIS strip. Subsequently a second 10 layer thick strip of SIS was assembled and placed to sandwich the coated mesh between the two SIS strips.

Lamination of the thus assembled implant was initiated under high pressure using a pneumatic cylinder press Model BTP 501 A TRD Manufacturing Inc. Loves Park Ill. 61111. The press was operated at 40 psi air pressure to drive the piston which resulted in a total compressive force of approximately 4000 lbs on the assembled implant. This force created an approximate average lamination pressure of 180 psi on the implant. The sample was compressed for 15 minutes at room temperature. This process resulted in a squeezing out of most of the bulk water associated with the SIS laminates and comminuted SIS and created a partially wet laminated implant.

The implant was subsequently dried under vacuum pressure using a flat bed gel drier system Model FB GD 45 Fisher Scientific Pittsburgh Pa. for 3 hours. The gel drier bed temperature was set at 30 C. for the procedure. This drying procedure resulted in a further reduction of the bulk water associated with the implant and also reduced the amount of bound water within the implant resulting in a final moisture content between 7 8 . This process also results in a physical crosslinking between the laminates of SIS and the comminuted SIS coating the synthetic mesh by further increasing the surface contact area of SIS material.

Implants were also made as described above but without coating the Panacryl mesh with the comminuted SIS fibers.

An agitation test was performed to test for resistance to delamination. High pressure laminated implants made as described in Example 13 both with and without SIS coating on the mesh were cut into several strips 1 cm wide and 5 cm long. Each strip was placed in 20 mL of reverse osmosis water at room temperature in a 50 mL glass flask. The flasks were secured on a shaker table set to agitate the samples at 300 rpm. Every five minutes the strips were examined for delamination between the SIS laminates and the synthetic mesh. On average reinforced implants without the comminuted SIS coated mesh delaminated after 60 minutes of agitation whereas reinforced implants with the comminuted SIS coating delaminated after 175 minutes.

It is expected that high pressure laminated SIS implants reinforced with a comminuted SIS coated synthetic mesh will also have higher and perhaps significantly higher mechanical properties e.g. higher ball burst strength as compared with implants made without high pressure lamination or without a comminuted SIS coating on the synthetic mesh.

Although the invention has been described in detail with reference to certain preferred embodiments variations and modifications exist within the scope and spirit of the invention as described and defined in the following claims.

