---

title: Compositions and methods for modulating rank activities
abstract: The present invention provides methods for identifying agents capable of modulating RANK-mediated signaling pathways. The present invention also provides compositions and methods of using the same to treat osteoporosis or other RANK-related diseases. The present invention is based on the functional and structural analysis of three TRAF-binding motifs (PTM)—namely, PTM3, PTM5, and PTM6, each of which has been found to play a distinct role in the activation of RANK-mediated intracellular signaling. These PTMs can be used to screen for RANK modulators. These PTMs also represent potential drug targets for diseases that are associated with abnormal RANK expression or activity.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08853367&OS=08853367&RS=08853367
owner: The UAB Research Foundation
number: 08853367
owner_city: Birmingham
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050914
---
This application is a national stage application under 35 U.S.C. 371 from International Application No. PCT US2005 032396 filed Sep. 14 2005 which claims priority benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 609 822 filed Sep. 14 2004 the entire disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference.

This invention was made at least in part by using funds from National Institutes of Health Grant AR 47830 X.F. National Institutes of Health RCC Grant UAB Core Center for Musculoskeletal Disorders P30AR46031 . Consequently the federal government may have certain rights in this invention.

The instant application contains a Sequence Listing which has been submitted in ASCII format via EFS Web and is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Said ASCII copy created on Mar. 28 2012 is named 23976002.txt and is 22 985 bytes in size.

The present invention relates to the structure and function of TRAF binding motifs PTMs in the cytoplasmic domain of RANK and methods for identifying. RANK modulators. The present invention also relates to compositions and methods for treating osteoporosis and other RANK related diseases.

Osteoclasts the principal bone resorbing cells play a pivotal role in skeleton development and maintenance. Osteoclasts are derived from mononuclear precursors of monocyte macrophage lineage upon stimulation of two key factors monocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor M CSF and receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B RANKL also known as OPGL ODF TRANCE . RANKL a member of the tumor necrosis factor TNF superfamily regulates both osteoclast formation and function by binding to its receptor RANK expressed on osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts. The essential role of RANKL and RANK in the osteoclastogenic process has been demonstrated by the findings that mice lacking the gene for either protein develop osteopetrosis due to failure to form osteoclasts.

RANK receptor activator of NF B was identified as a member of the TNF receptor family. Members of the TNF receptor family lack intrinsic enzymatic activity. They usually transduce intracellular signals by recruiting various adaptor proteins such as TNF receptor associated factors TRAFs through specific motifs in the cytoplasmic domains. Since the unraveling of the RANKL RANK system efforts have been undertaken to elucidate RANK initiated intracellular signaling. Many of these efforts have focused on the characterization of the receptor proximal signaling events which represent the initial components of RANK mediated signaling. Although these studies have mapped RANK cytoplasmic regions by using in vitro binding assays their physiological relevance to osteoclast biology remains largely unexplored.

The discovery of the RANKL RANK OPG regulatory axis has also raised high expectation for osteoprotegerin OPG and soluble RANK Fc as therapeutic drugs for treating bone diseases. However both OPG and RANK Fc lack specificity and the use of OPG or RANK Fc may produce adverse effects on other biological processes that involve RANK such as the development of immune system and mammary gland. Accordingly there is a need for more specific RANK modulators and methods for identifying them.

The present invention is based on the identification of three PTM motifs which are responsible for osteoclast differentiation function and survival. Each of these motifs plays a distinct role in the activation of RANK mediated signaling pathways. The characterization of these motifs allows the identification of molecules that can modulate activities of specific PTM motifs and be used to treat osteoporosis rheumatoid arthritis or other RANK related diseases.

In one aspect the present invention provides methods for identifying agents capable of modulating RANK activity. These methods comprise 

contacting a ligand with one or more cells in the presence of a molecule of interest where each cell comprises a chimeric protein which includes 1 a non RANK sequence capable of binding to the ligand and 2 a sequence comprising one or more PTM motifs selected from the group consisting of PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 and the treatment of the cell s with the ligand induces oligomerization of the chimeric protein and thereby activates a RANK mediated signaling pathway in the cell s and

detecting the activation level of the RANK mediated signaling pathway in the cell s after the ligand treatment.

The activation level thus detected as compared to a control level is therefore indicative of whether the molecule of interest can modulate the RANK mediated signaling pathway.

The chimeric protein employed in the invention preferably is a transmembrane protein which comprises a non RANK extracellular domain and a RANK cytoplasmic domain including one or more functional PTM motifs. In certain examples the non RANK extracellular domain is an extracellular domain of a non RANK TNFR superfamily member such as TNFR1 TNFR2 Fas or CD40.

The non RANK extracellular domain can be selected such that the ligand employed can selectively bind to the domain but not other proteins e.g. endogenous membrane proteins in the cell s that would trigger activation of RANK mediated signaling pathways. This can be achieved for example by using a non RANK extracellular domain heterologous to the cell s . In a non limiting example the cell s can be murine cell s and the non RANK extracellular domain is derived from a non mouse protein such as a human protein. In another example the cell s can be human cell s and the non RANK extracellular domain is derived from a non human protein such as a murine protein.

Cells suitable for the present invention include but are not limited to bone marrow macrophage cells osteoclast precursor cells or osteoclast cells. Other cells that include. RANK signaling machineries can also be used. Non limiting examples of suitable cells include RAW264.7 or J774 cells.

In one embodiment a chimeric protein employed in the invention comprises a functional PTM3 motif but does not have any functional PTM5 or PTM6 motif. Cells comprising this chimeric protein can be used to identify molecules that are capable of inhibiting or otherwise modulating PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathways e.g. pathways that lead to the activation of NF B JNK ERK p38 or Akt PKB .

In another embodiment a chimeric protein employed in the invention comprises a functional PTM5 motif but does not have any functional PTM3 or PTM6 motif. Cells comprising this chimeric protein can be used to identify molecules that are capable of inhibiting or otherwise modulating PTM5 mediated RANK signaling pathways e.g. pathways that lead to the activation of NF B or p38 .

In still another embodiment a chimeric protein employed in the invention comprises a functional PTM6 motif but does not have any functional PTM3 or PTM5 motif. Cells comprising this chimeric protein can be used to identify molecules that are capable of inhibiting or otherwise modulating PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathways e.g. pathways that lead to the activation of NF B .

In a further embodiment a chimeric protein employed in the invention comprises at least two functional PTM motifs each of which is selected from the group consisting of PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6. Oligomerization of this chimeric protein activates at least two distinct RANK mediated signaling pathways each of which is selected from the a PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathway a PTM5 mediated RANK signaling pathway or a PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathway. Molecules capable of inhibiting or otherwise modulating these distinct signaling pathways can therefore be identified.

The activation level of a RANK mediated signaling pathway in the cell s can be detected by a variety of means. For instance the activation level can be determined by measuring the phosphorylation level of I B JNK ERK p38 or Akt PKB. The activation level can also be evaluated by monitoring the expression level of a downstream gene that is regulated by NF B or AFX FOXO4.

In addition reporter assays can be used to detect the activation level of a RANK mediated signaling pathway. In a non limiting example a reporter assay of the invention utilizes a reporter vector which comprises a reporter gene operably linked to a promoter that includes one or more NF B binding sites. The reporter vector is introduced into the cell s comprising a chimeric protein of the invention. Binding of the chimeric protein to a suitable ligand induces oligomerization of the protein which triggers a RANK initiated signaling pathway. This in turn leads to the phosphorylation and degradation of I B and therefore activation of NF B transcription factor. The activated NF B binds to the NF B binding site s in the promoter of the reporter gene inducing or suppressing the expression of the reporter gene. As a result the activation level of a RANK mediated pathway can be determined by measuring the level of expression of the reporter gene in the cell s . Reporter genes suitable for this purpose include but are not limited to green fluorescent protein luciferase horse radish peroxidase alkaline phosphatase galactosidase or chloramphenicol acetyl transferase.

The present invention also features the use of reporter vectors that comprise a report gene operably linked to a promoter including one or more AFX FOXO4 binding sites. These reporter vectors can be used to monitor the activation of RANK mediated osteoclast survival signals. Molecules capable of modulating osteoclast survival can therefore be identified using the methods described herein.

In another aspect the present invention features other methods for identifying agents capable of modulating RANK activity. These methods comprise 

contacting a ligand with one or more osteoclast precursor cells in the presence of a molecule of interest where each cell comprises a chimeric protein which includes 1 a non RANK sequence capable of binding to the ligand and 2 a sequence comprising one or more PTM motifs selected from the group consisting of PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 and the treatment of the cell s with the ligand induces oligomerization of the chimeric protein and thereby activates a RANK mediated signaling pathway in the cell s and

The level of osteoclastogenesis thus detected as compared to a control level is indicative of whether the molecule of interest is capable of modulating RANK activity.

In still another aspect the present invention features another method for identifying RANK modulators. This method comprises 

contacting a ligand with one or more osteoclast or osteoclast precursor cells in the presence of a molecule of interest where each cell comprises a chimeric protein which includes 1 a non RANK sequence capable of binding to the ligand and 2 a sequence comprising one or more PTM motifs selected from the group consisting of PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 and the treatment of the cell s with the ligand induces oligomerization of the chimeric protein and thereby activates a RANK mediated signaling pathway in the cell s and

The survival level thus detected as compared to a control survival level is indicative of whether the molecule of interest is capable of modulating RANK activity.

In yet another aspect the present invention features another method for identifying RANK modulators. This method comprises 

contacting a ligand with one or more osteoclast precursor cells in the presence of a molecule of interest where each cell comprises a chimeric protein which includes 1 a non RANK sequence capable of binding to the ligand and 2 a sequence comprising one or more PTM motifs selected from the group consisting of PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 and the treatment of the cell s with the ligand induces oligomerization of the chimeric protein and thereby activates a RANK mediated signaling pathway in the cell s and

The bone resorption capability thus detected as compared to a control level is indicative of whether the molecule of interest is capable of modulating RANK activity.

The activation level of RANK mediated signaling the level of osteoclastogenesis or bone resorption or the level of osteoclast survival can be compared to a control level to determine whether a molecule of interest modulates RANK activity. A control level can be a negative control level e.g. a level measured using the same assay but absent the molecule of interest or a level measured using the same assay in the presence of the molecule of interest except that the PTM s being investigate is deactivated in the chimeric protein . A control level can also be a positive control level e.g. a level measured using the same assay in the presence of a known RANK modulator . In many cases a control level is an average of levels measured under the control conditions.

The present invention further features RANK modulators that are identified according to the methods of the present invention and compositions comprising the same. In one example a composition of the invention comprises a first agent capable of modulating PTM3 mediated RANK signaling and a second agent capable of modulating PTM5 mediated RANK signaling. In another example a composition of the invention comprises a first agent capable of modulating PTM3 mediated RANK signaling and a second agent capable of modulating PTM6 mediated RANK signaling. In still another example a composition of the invention comprises a first agent capable of modulating PTM5 mediated RANK signaling and a second agent capable of modulating PTM6 mediated RANK signaling. In a further example a composition of the invention comprises an agent capable of modulating at least two RANK mediated signal transduction pathways selected from the group consisting of a PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathway a PTM5 mediated RANK signaling pathway and a PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathway.

In addition the present invention features the use of binding assays to screen for RANK modulators. These methods typically comprise 

detecting a level of binding between a first TRAF protein and a first polypeptide comprising a first PTM motif in the presence of a molecule of interest where the first TRAF protein is capable of binding to the first PTM motif in the absence of the molecule of interest and

detecting a level of binding between a second TRAF protein and a second polypeptide comprising a second PTM motif in the presence of said molecule of interest where the second TRAF protein is capable of binding to the second PTM motif in the absence of the molecule of interest.

The first and second PTM motifs can be selected from the group consisting of PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6. The binding level between the first TRAF and the first polypeptide and the binding level between the second TRAF and the second polypeptide as compare to control levels are indicative of whether the molecule of interest is capable of modulating RANK activity.

Furthermore the present invention features methods of modulating RANK activity in a cell of interest. These methods comprise contacting one or more agents with a cell to modulate at least two RANK mediated signaling pathways in the cell where each of the signaling pathways is selected from a PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathway a PTM5 mediated RANK signaling pathway or a PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathway. In one example the cell is contacted with at least two agents each of which inhibits a different respective RANK signaling pathway. The cell of interest can be without limitation an osteoclast cell or an osteoclast precursor cell.

The present invention further features methods for modulating RANK activity in a subject in need thereof. The methods comprise administering one or more agents to the subject to inhibit at least two RANK mediated pathways in a cell of the subject e.g. an osteoclast cell or an osteoclast precursor cell . Each of the RANK mediated pathways can be selected from a PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathway a PTM5 mediated. RANK signaling pathway or a PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathway. Subjects suitable for this treatment include patients who have osteoporosis rheumatoid arthritis associated bone loss cancer induced osteolysis or other RANK related bone disorders.

The present invention also features chimeric proteins comprising an oligomerizable non RANK extracellular domain and a RANK intracellular domain with one or more functional PTM motifs. Mutations can be introduced into the RANK intracellular domain to deactivate selected PTM motif s .

Other features objects and advantages of the invention are apparent in the detailed description that follows. It should be understood however that the detailed description while indicating preferred embodiments of the invention is given by way of illustration only not limitation. Various changes and modifications within the scope of the invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art from the detailed description.

The present invention is based on the identification and characterization of three TRAF binding motifs PTMs in the cytoplasmic domain of RANK namely PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6. Each of these motifs plays distinct roles in the activation of RANK mediated intracellular signaling pathways and the mediation of osteoclast formation function and survival. PTM3 can mediate NF B nuclear factor kappa B JNK c Jun N terminal kinase ERK extracellular signal regulated kinase and p38 signaling pathways PTM5 is capable of activating NF B and p38 signaling pathways and PTM6 can activate NF B signaling pathway. PTM3 is also involved in osteoclast survival through mediating RANKL induced activation of Akt PKB which leads to the phosphorylation of the downstream effector AFX FOXO4.

PTM3 plays a predominant role in promoting osteoclast survival but has a less prominent role in osteoclast formation and function. PTM5 and PTM6 are highly potent in osteoclast formation and function but have only moderate effects on osteoclast survival. The revelation of the distinct functions of these RANK motifs allows for the identification of molecules that can selectively modulate RANK activities in osteoclastogenesis mammary gland development dendritic cell T cell communication or survival of leukemic or osteoclast cells. These RANK motifs also represent potential drug targets for osteoporosis rheumatoid arthritis cancer induced bone lesions T cell or B cell malignancies and other RANK related diseases.

In one aspect the present invention provides methods for identifying or evaluating agents capable of modulating RANK mediated signaling pathways. These methods typically include inducing oligomerization of a chimeric protein in a cell or a cell free system and detecting the activities of RANK mediated signaling pathways in the cell or cell free system. The chimeric protein employed can be a transmembrane protein comprising an oligomerizable extracellular domain and an intracellular domain including one or more PTMs selected from PTM3 PTM5 PTM6 or their functional equivalents. The oligomerization of the chimeric protein triggers activation of PTM mediated RANK signaling pathways. The activation levels of these pathways in the presence of a molecule of interest can be detected and compared to control levels e.g. activation levels measured in the absence of the molecule or in the presence of the molecule but with a control protein in which the functional PTM s being investigated is deactivated . Molecules capable of inhibiting or otherwise modulating the activation levels of these pathways can therefore be identified.

Preferably the extracellular domain of the chimeric protein can induce oligomerization e.g. trimerization of the chimeric protein upon binding to a non RANKL ligand. Extracellular domains suitable for this purpose include but are not limited to the extracellular domains of non RANK tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily members such as TNFR1 tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 1A TNFR2 tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 1B Fas tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 6 or CD40 tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 5 . The extracellular domains of other receptor proteins whose activation can be triggered by oligomerization can also be used. In addition other oligomerizable polypeptides or protein fragments can be used. Non limiting examples of these polypeptides protein fragments include antigenic polypeptides that can form trimers or oligomers when bound to their corresponding antibodies.

The extracellular domain of a chimeric protein employed in the invention can be selected such that its ligand can selectively induce oligomerization of the chimeric protein but not other receptor proteins in the cell that would trigger activation of RANK associated signaling pathways. This can be achieved for example by using an extracellular domain that is heterologous to the cell. In a non limiting example the cell employed is a murine or human cell while the extracellular domain of the chimeric protein is derived from a non mouse or non human protein such that the ligand for the extracellular domain does not bind to any murine or human receptor proteins. Extracellular domains whose ligands can activate other receptor proteins may also be used provided that the signaling activities mediated by the chimeric protein can be distinguished from those mediated by other receptor proteins.

PTMs suitable for the present invention include but are not limited to murine or human PTMs or their functional equivalents. PTMs of other species may also be used. These PTMs are capable of recruiting respective TRAFs upon oligomerization or activation of the chimeric protein. At least six TRAF family members have been identified TRAFs 1 6 . Each TRAF protein contains a ring and zinc finger motif in its N or C terminal domain which can mediate self association and protein interaction. See e.g. Inoue et al. E. CR254 14 24. 2000 .

TRAF1 and TRAF2 can form a heterodimeric complex which involves in TNF mediated activation of MAPK8 JNK and NF B. The protein complex formed by TRAF1 and TRAF2 also interacts with inhibitor of apoptosis proteins IAPs and thus mediates the anti apoptotic signals from TNF receptors. The expression of this protein can be induced by Epstein Barr virus EBV . EBV infection membrane protein 1 LMP1 is found to interact with this and other TRAF proteins this interaction is thought to link LMP1 mediated B lymphocyte transformation to the signal transduction from TNFR family receptors. Multiple alternatively spliced transcript variants have been found for TRAF2 gene but the biological validity of only one transcript has been determined.

TRAF3 has been reported to function in the signal transduction of CD40 a TNFR family member important for the activation of the immune response. TRAF3 is found to be a critical component of the lymphotoxin receptor LTbetaR signaling complex which induces NF B activation and cell death initiated by LTbeta ligation. Epstein Barr virus encoded latent infection membrane protein 1 LMP1 can interact with this and several other members of the TRAF family which may be essential for the oncogenic effects of LMP1. Three alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding two distinct isoforms have been reported.

TRAF4 has been shown to interact with neurotrophin receptor p75 NTR NTSR1 and negatively regulate NTR induced cell death and NF B activation. This protein has been found to bind to p47phox a cytosolic regulatory factor included in a multi protein complex known as NAD P H oxidase. This protein is thought to be involved in the oxidative activation of MAPK8 JNK. Two alternatively spliced transcript variants of this gene encoding distinct isoforms have been reported.

TRAF5 has been found to be one of the components of a multiple protein complex associated with the CD40 cytoplasmic domain which mediates TNF induced NF B activation and protection from cell death. This protein has also been implicated in the signaling events mediated by various other receptors including CD27 CD30 and lymphotoxin beta receptor. Two alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding the same protein have been reported.

TRAF6 mediates the signaling not only from the members of the TNF receptor superfamily but also from the members of the Toll IL 1 family. Signals from receptors such as CD40 RANK and IL 1 have been shown to be mediated by this protein. TRAF6 also interacts with various protein kinases including IRAK1 IRAK SRC and PKCzeta which provides a link between distinct signaling pathways. TRAF6 functions as a signal transducer in the NF B pathway that activates TO kinase IKK in response to proinflammatory cytokines. The interaction of TRAF6 with UBE2N UBC13 and UBE2V1 UEV1A which are ubiquitin conjugating enzymes catalyzing the formation of polyubiquitin chains has been found to be required for IKK activation by this protein. Two alternatively spliced transcript variants encoding identical proteins have been reported.

TRAFs 1 2 3 5 and 6 have been reported to interact with various parts of the RANK cytoplasmic domain both in vitro and in cells. See for example Darnay et al. J. B. C273 20551 20555 1998 Galibert et al. J. B. C273 34120 34127 1998 Wong et al. J. B. C273 28355 28359 1998 Darnay et al. J. B. C274 7724 7731 1999 Kim et al. FEBS L443 297 302 1999 and Ye et al. N418 443 44 2002 . All of these references are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties.

In one embodiment the chimeric proteins employed in the present invention comprise an endogenous RANK cytoplasmic domain which includes PTM3 PTM5 or PTM6. Non limiting examples of suitable RANK cytoplasmic domains include the intracellular domains of murine and human RANK proteins. Murine and human RANK proteins have Entrez accession numbers NP033425 SEQ ID NO 32 and NP003830 SEQ ID NO 33 respectively. Their amino acid sequences are depicted in SEQ ID NO 32 and SEQ ID NO 33 respectively. The intracellular domain of murine RANK protein consists of amino acid 235 to 625 of SEQ ID NO 32 and the intracellular domain of human RANK protein consists of amino acids 232 to 616 of SEQ ID NO 33. Cytoplasmic domains of other RANK proteins can also be used. RANK genes of other species can be readily identified based on murine or human sequences. Methods suitable for this purpose include but are not limited to genomic or cDNA library screens or genome BLAST searches. Genomes of many species are available at Entrez National Center for Biotechnology Information Bethesda Md. 20894 . The RANK gene of a species of interest can be identified through BLAST searching the genome of interest by using the murine or human sequence as the query sequence. The cytoplasmic domain of a RANK gene thus identified can be determined by using transmembrane prediction programs such as TMHMM or other suitable means known in the art.

In another embodiment the chimeric proteins employed in the present invention include one or more fragments of an endogenous RANK cytoplasmic domain. Each fragment includes one or more PTM motifs selected from PTM3 PTM5 or PTM6 and can bind to a respective TRAF protein upon oligomerization of the chimeric protein to activate the downstream signaling pathway. Suitable PTMs for this purpose include murine and human PTMs. PTMs of other species can also be employed. Murine PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 motifs comprise PFQEP SEQ ID NO 1 amino acids 369 373 of NP033425 SEQ ID NO 32 PVQEET SEQ ID NO 2 amino acids 560 565 of NP033425 SEQ ID NO 32 and PVQEQG SEQ ID NO 3 amino acids 604 609 of NP033425 SEQ ID NO 32 respectively and human PTMS PTM5 and PTM6 motifs comprise PFSEP SEQ ID NO 4 amino acids 373 377 of NP003830 SEQ ID NO 33 PVQEET SEQ ID NO 2 amino acids 569 574 of NP003830 SEQ ID NO 33 and PVQEQG SEQ ID NO 3 amino acids 607 612 of NP003830 SEQ ID NO 33 respectively.

Amino acid residues surrounding SEQ ID NOs 1 4 in the endogenous RANK cytoplasmic domains can also be included in a chimeric protein to improve its interaction with TRAF protein s . For instance a chimeric protein of the present invention can include a mouse RANK cytoplasmic domain consisting of GSKSIPPFQEPLEVGENDSLSQCFTGTESTV SEQ ID NO 5 EPESEPVGRPVQEETL AHRDSFAG SEQ ID NO 6 or TSRPVQEQGGAQT SEQ ID NO 7 . A chimeric protein of the present invention can also include a human RANK cytoplasmic domain consisting of GSKSTPPFSEPLEVGENDSLSQCFTGTQSTV SEQ ID NO 8 AEPMGRPVQEETLARRDSFAG SEQ ID. NO 9 or ASRPVQEQGGAK SEQ ID NO 10 .

Fragments of SEQ ID NOs 5 10 can also be used. Each fragment includes at least a PTM sequence selected from SEQ ID NOs 1 4 and is capable of binding to a respective TRAF protein upon oligomerization of the chimeric protein. In many cases each of these fragments includes an endogenous. RANK cytoplasmic sequence consisting of from about 5 to about 10 from about 10 to about 20 or from about 20 to about 30 amino acid residues selected from SEQ ID NOs 5 10.

Each chimeric protein of the present invention can include 1 2 3 or more PTMs selected from PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6. A chimeric protein of the invention can also include deactivated PTM motif s . For instance a chimeric protein can include a functional PTM3 but does not have any functional PTM5 or PTM6. A chimeric protein can also include a functional. PTM5 but does not have any functional PTM3 or PTM6. Likewise a chimeric protein can include a functional PTM6 but does not have any functional PTM3 or PTM5. Each functional PTM is capable of activating its corresponding signaling pathway upon oligomerization of the chimeric protein e.g. a PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathway a PTM5 mediated RANK signaling pathway or a PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathway. PTMs in a chimeric protein of the invention can be derived from the same or different species.

In still another embodiment a chimeric protein of the invention comprises an extracellular domain of a non RANK TNF receptor superfamily member e.g. TNFR1 TNFR2 Fas or CD40 and a RANK cytoplasmic domain with mutations in one or more PTMs. Suitable PTM mutations include but are not limited to those described in . Other mutations can also be used. These mutations typically include substitutions deletions or additions of amino acid residues in or around the PTM s that is to be deactivated. These mutations disrupt or significantly reduce the interactions of the selected PTM s with its downstream effector s . Preferably these mutations do not prevent the chimeric protein from oligomerization upon binding to its ligand.

In a non limiting example a chimeric protein of the invention comprises a RANK cytoplasmic domain in which the PTM5 and PTM6 motifs are deactivated while the PTM3 motif remains functional. Oligomerization of this chimeric protein activates the PTM3 mediated pathways such as the NF B pathway the Akt PKB pathway the JNK pathway the ERK pathway or the p38 pathway. In another example a chimeric protein of the invention comprises a RANK cytoplasmic domain in which the PTM3 and PTM6 motifs are deactivated while the PTM5 motif remains functional. Oligomerization of the chimeric protein activates the PTM5 mediated pathways such as the NF B pathway or the p38 pathway. In still another example a chimeric protein of the invention comprises a RANK cytoplasmic domain in which the PTM3 and PTM5 motifs are deactivated while the PTM6 motif remains functional. Oligomerization of this protein activates the PTM6 mediated pathways such as the NF B pathway.

The extracellular and cytoplasmic domains of a chimeric protein can be derived from the same species. For instance both the extracellular and cytoplasmic domains can be derived from murine or human sequences. The extracellular and cytoplasmic domains of a chimeric protein can also be derived from different species. For instance the extracellular domain can be derived from a human sequence e.g. human TNFR1 TNFR2 Fas or CD40 while the cytoplasmic domain is derived from a murine sequence e.g. murine RANK protein and vice versa. The extracellular domain of a chimeric protein can include either a full length extracellular sequence of a non RANK TNF receptor superfamily member or a fragment thereof provided that the fragment can bind to a ligand to induce oligomerization of the chimeric protein. Exemplary ligands for TNFR1 TNFR2 Fas and CD40 include but are not limited to TNF FASL and CD40L respectively. Preferably soluble ligands e.g. soluble FASL or CD40L extracellular domains are used to induce oligomerization of the corresponding chimeric proteins. FASL or CD40L expressed on cell surfaces can also be used. Contacting such a cell with a cell that expresses a chimeric protein comprising a Fas or CD40 extracellular domain will induce oligomerization of the chimeric protein thereby activating RANK mediated signaling pathways in the cell. Antibodies specific for the extracellular domains of TNFR1 TNFR2 Fas or CD40 can also be used to trigger oligomerization of chimeric proteins that comprise these extracellular domains. Other oligomerizable polypeptides such as those capable of being clustered via antibodies can also be used.

The present invention further contemplates the use of non transmembrane proteins for the identification of RANK modulators. These non transmembrane proteins include one or more PTMs capable of interacting with corresponding TRAFs to activate the downstream signaling pathways. Each of the PTMs is selected from PTM3 PTM5 or PTM6. In many cases the non transmembrane proteins are cytosolic proteins which include a domain that can trigger protein oligomerization upon occurrence of a specified event such as binding to a ligand or changing in the ionic strength. In certain cases the non transmembrane proteins can activate RANK signaling without a triggering event.

A variety of methods can be used to assess the activation of PTM mediated RANK signaling pathways. Exemplary methods include but are not limited to those suitable for detecting or monitoring the activities of NF B JNK ERK p38 or Akt PKB signaling pathways. Specific methods are described in the Examples infra which involve the detection of phosphorylation of I B JNK ERK p38 or Akt PKB. RANK modulators can be identified by comparing the phosphorylation level of NB JNK ERK p38 or Akt PKB in the presence of a molecule of interest to a control phosphorylation level measured in the absence of the molecule. Methods suitable for this purpose include but are not limited to gel scanners gel imagers or gel densitometers. In many cases modulators thus identified can inhibit phosphorylation of I B JNK ERK p38 or Akt PKB by at least 2 3 4 5 or more folds.

The activation of PTM mediated RANK signaling pathways can also be evaluated by monitoring osteoclast formation function or survival. Methods suitable for this purpose include but are not limited to osteoclastogenesis bone resorption or osteoclast survival assays. See for example Examples 1 and 6 infra Armstrong et al. J. Biol. Chem. 277 44347 44356 2002 and Ye et al. supra . A typical osteoclastogenesis assay includes introducing a chimeric protein of the present invention into an osteoclast precursor cell such as a bone marrow macrophage or a splenic hematopoietic progenitor cell followed by adding a ligand to induce oligomerization of the chimeric protein thereby initiating cellular differentiation. Molecules capable of inhibiting or interfering with osteoclast differentiation can be identified by comparing the level of osteoclastogenesis in the presence of the molecules to that in the absence of the molecules. In many cases molecules thus identified can reduce osteoclast differentiation or osteoclastogenesis by at least 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 or 100 .

Methods suitable for introducing a chimeric protein or an expression vector encoding the same into a cell of interest are well known in the art. Expression vectors suitable for this purpose include for example viral vectors such as retroviral lentiviral adenoviral adeno associated viral AAV herpes viral alphavirus astrovirus coronavirus orthomyxovirus papovavirus paramyxovirus parvovirus picornavirus poxvirus or togavirus vectors. Liposomally encapsulated expression vectors can also be used.

In addition osteoclast bone resorption and osteoclast survival assays can be used to evaluate activities of PTM mediated RANK signaling pathways. RANK modulators capable of inhibiting osteoclast bone resorption or osteoclast survival can be identified by comparing the level of bone resorption or osteoclast survival in the presence of the modulators to a control level e.g. a level measured in the absence of the modulators or in the presence of the modulators but using a control protein in which the PTM s being investigated is deactivated . In many cases modulators thus identified can inhibit osteoclast dependent bone resorption or osteoclast survival activities by at least 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 or 100 .

The present invention also features the use of reporter assays to screen for RANK modulators. Suitable reporter assays include but are not limited to those described in Galibert et al. 1998 supra Darnay et al. 1999 supra and Ye et al. supra . In one embodiment a reporter assay of the invention employs a reporter vector which comprises a reporter gene operably linked to a promoter including one or more NF B binding sites. The reporter vector is introduced into a cell which expresses a chimeric protein of the invention. Oligomerization of the chimeric protein upon ligand binding triggers phosphorylation and degradation of I B which in turn activates NF B. The activated NF B translocates into the nucleus binding to the NF B binding site s in the promoter of the reporter gene and thereby activating the expression of the reporter gene. A molecule of interest can be added to the cell. A reduction in the expression level of the reporter gene in the presence of the molecule of interest as compared to a control expression level e.g. a level measured in the absence of the molecule or in the presence of the molecule but using a control chimeric protein in which the PTM s being investigated is deactivated is indicative that the molecule of interest is capable of inhibiting the RANK signaling mediated by the chimeric protein. In many cases molecules thus identified can inhibit the expression of the reporter gene by at least 2 3 4 5 or more folds.

NF B is a ubiquitous transcriptional factor. It was originally identified as a protein complex consisting of a 65 kDa DNA binding subunit and an associated 50 kDa protein. The 65 kDa subunit also referred to as Rel A is functionally related to c Rel p75. The p50 subunit of NF B is derived from the amino terminus of a precursor designated p105. A second protein designated p52 previously referred to as p49 has also been identified and can act as an alternative to p50 in NF B heterodimers.

Many genes involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis contain NF B binding sites in their promoter regions. Activated NF B can bind to these sites to activate the expression of the downstream genes. A consensus NF B binding sequence is depicted in SEQ ID NO 34. Specific examples of NF B binding sites are illustrated in SEQ ID NOs 35 and 36. Other NF B binding sequences such as that described in Lavrovsky et al. P. N. A. S91 5987 5991 1994 can also be used.

In addition the present invention contemplates the use of promoters containing inhibitory NF B binding sites. Binding of NF B to these sites inhibits the expression of the downstream reporter genes. Non limiting examples of such promoters include murine I and human I collagen promoters. An exemplary inhibitory NF B binding site is described in Novitskiy et al. J. B. C279 15639 15644 2004 the sequence of which is depicted in SEQ ID NO 37. Where an inhibitory NF B site is used the expression level of the reporter gene can be monitored for any increase caused by the presence of a molecule of interest as compared to a control expression level e.g. in the absence of the molecule or in the presence of the molecule but using a control chimeric protein in which the PTM s being investigated is deactivated . Molecules capable of enhancing the expression of the reporter gene can be identified. In many cases molecules thus identified can increase the expression level of the reporter gene by at least 2 3 4 5 or more folds. These molecules are RANK modulators that can inhibit RANK signaling. The NF B binding site s employed in the invention can be located 100 to 2 000 bp upstream from the start of transcription e.g. the TATA box of the reporter gene. NF B binding sites located within 100 bp or beyond 2 000 bp may also be used. In addition more than one NF B binding sites can be included in the promoter of the reporter gene to improve the sensitivity or selectivity of detection. For instance at least 2 3 4 5 or more NF B binding sites can be included in the promoter of the reporter gene. These sites can have the same or different NF B binding sequences.

In another embodiment a reporter assay of the present invention employs a reporter vector which comprises a reporter gene operably linked to a promoter including one or more AFX FOXO4 binding sites. A consensus AFX FOXO4 binding sequence is depicted in SEQ ID NO 38. Specific examples of AFX FOXO4 binding sites are described in SEQ ID NOs 39 and 40. See also Tang et al. J. B. C277 14255 14265 2002 . The expression vector is introduced into a cell comprising a chimeric protein of the invention. Oligomerization of the chimeric protein upon ligand binding activates Akt PKB which leads to the phosphorylation and inactivation of AFX FOXO4 thereby reducing the expression of the reporter gene. The expression level of the reporter gene can be evaluated in the presence or absence of a molecule of interest. Molecules capable of inhibiting the suppression of the reporter gene can therefore be identified. These molecules are modulators for osteoclast survival and are capable of blocking the RANK mediated activation of Akt PKB.

Reporter genes suitable for the present invention include those genes whose expression products are detectable by spectroscopic photochemical biochemical enzymatic immunochemical electrical optical chemical or other means. Exemplary reporter genes include but are not limited to fluorescent proteins e.g. green fluorescent protein GFP red fluorescent protein RFP or blue fluorescent protein BFP enzymes. e.g. luciferase horse radish peroxidase alkaline phosphatase galactosidase or chloramphenicol acetyl transferase CAT or surface antigens for which specific antibodies are available. Reporter gene activity in cells or cell lysates can be analyzed by standard methods such as luminometry for luciferase activity or fluorescence microscopy for fluorescent proteins.

Cells that are amenable to the reporter assays of the present invention include but are not limited to bone marrow macrophages osteoclast cells or osteoclast precursor cells. These cells can be human or non human cell lines or primary cell cultures. Specific examples of these cells include murine macrophage RAW cell lines e.g. RAW 264.7 with ATCC TIB71 and murine macrophage J774 cell lines e.g. .J774.1 with ATCC TIB67 . Other cells that include RANK signaling machineries such as those required for the activation of NF B or Akt PKB can also be used.

The reporter assays of the present invention typically involve contacting a test agent with a cell comprising a chimeric protein of the invention and a reporter vector and detecting expression of the reporter gene. The expression level of the reporter gene as compared to a control indicates that the test agent modulates the activity of the RANK mediated signaling pathway e.g. the NF B or AFX FOXO4 pathway . The test agent can be virtually any type of molecule. It can exist as a single isolated molecule or can be a member of a chemical library e.g. a combinatorial library .

Where the change in the expression level of the reporter gene is determined with respect to a control the control can be a negative control e.g. the same assay absent the test agent or with the test agent at a lower concentration. Another suitable negative control uses the same assay but with a different chimeric protein in which the PTM s being investigated is deactivated. Alternatively or in addition the control can be a positive control e.g. the same assay run with an agent known to inhibit or otherwise modulate RANK mediated signaling pathways.

A change in the expression level of the reporter gene is preferably a statistically significant change e.g. as determined using any statistical test suited for the data set provided e.g. t test analysis of variance semiparametric techniques or non parametric techniques such as Wilcoxon Mann Whitney Test Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test Sign Test or Kruskal Wallis Test . Preferably the statistically significant change is significant at least at the 85 more preferably at least at the 90 still more preferably at least at the 95 and most preferably at least at the 98 or 99 confidence level. In many examples the change is at least a 10 20 50 100 200 300 400 or 500 change as compared to a negative control.

The reporter assays of the invention can take place in a wide variety of formats. For instance a single test agent can be screened with one or more cell lines. In addition multiple agents can be screened against one or more cell lines at the same time. This can be accomplished by contacting different test agents with each cell line in a separate reaction vessel or well. Alternatively multiple test agents can be assayed in a single assay. Those assays that test positive are then deconvolved in subsequent assays to determine which of the test agents in the positive screen was responsible for the positive signal.

The reporter assays of the invention can be run in any convenient format. In one embodiment the assays are run in a multi well format e.g. a 96 or 384 well plate suitable for high throughput screening. Other high throughput screening methods can also be used.

In one example a combinatorial chemical library is employed to screen for RANK modulators. A combinatorial chemical library is a collection of diverse chemical compounds generated by either chemical synthesis or biological synthesis by combining a number of chemical building blocks. For example a linear combinatorial chemical library such as a polypeptide library is formed by combining a set of chemical building blocks e.g. amino acids in many possible ways for a given compounds length i.e. the number of amino acids in a polypeptide compound . Millions of chemical compounds can be synthesized through such combinatorial mixing of chemical building blocks.

Preparation and screening of combinatorial chemical libraries are well known to those of skill in the art. Such combinatorial chemical libraries include but are not limited to peptides peptoids random bio oligomers benzodiazepines diversomers e.g. hydantoins benzodiazepines and dipeptides vinylogous polypeptides nonpeptidal peptidomimetics with a D glucose scaffolding oligocarbamates peptidyl phosphonates peptide nucleic acids antibodies carbohydrates or small organic molecule libraries e.g. benzodiazepines isoprenoids thiazolidinones and metathiazanones pyrrolidines morpholino compounds or benzodiazepines libraries .

Any chimeric protein described herein can be used in a reporter assay of the invention. In one embodiment the reporter assay employs a chimeric protein which includes an extracellular domain that is heterologous to the host cell and a RANK cytoplasmic domain comprising a functional PTM selected from PTM3 PTM5 or PTM6. Preferably the RANK cytoplasmic domain contains only one functional PTM selected from PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 and the remaining two PTMs are deactivated by mutations. This allows for the identification of molecules that modulate the activities of the selected PTM motif.

The extracellular domain can be selected such that its ligand selectively induces oligomerization e.g. trimerization of the chimeric protein but not other endogenous proteins in the host cell e.g. endogenous RANK or TNFR proteins . Preferably the ligand for the extracellular domain does not activate NF B in the host cell via receptors other than the chimeric protein. Non limiting examples of suitable extracellular domains include the extracellular domains of heterologous TNF receptor superfamily members such as heterologous TNFR1 TNFR2 Fas or CD40. In one example the host cell employed is a murine RAW or J774 cell and the extracellular domain of the chimeric protein is derived from a human TNFR1 TNFR2 Fas or CD40 protein.

The host cell employed further comprises a reporter vector which includes a reporter gene operably linked to a promoter comprising one or more NF B binding sites e.g. 1 2 3 4 5 or more NF B binding sites . Binding of NF B to the NF B site s activates or inhibits the expression of the reporter gene. Changes in the expression of the reporter gene can be detected using conventional means.

To identify molecules capable of inhibiting or otherwise modulating RANK signaling a test agent can be added to the host cell. A suitable ligand is added to trigger oligomerization of the chimeric protein. The expression level of the reporter gene is then detected in the presence of the test agent and compared to a control level e.g. a level measured in the absence of the test agent or in the presence of the test agent but using a different chimeric protein in which the PTM s being investigated is deactivated by mutations . A statistically significant difference between the expression level of the reporter gene in the presence of the test agent and the control level is indicative that the test agent is a RANK modulator. In many examples a test agent thus identified can inhibit the expression of the reporter gene by at least 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 or 100 as compared to a control level. In many other examples a test agent thus identified can increase the expression of the reporter gene by at least 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 200 300 400 or more.

In another example the chimeric protein employed in a reporter assay comprises a RANK cytoplasmic domain in which the PTM3 and PTM5 motifs are deactivated. This protein retains a functional PTM6 motif capable of mediating RANK signaling. Molecules capable of modulating e.g. inhibiting PTM6 mediated signaling can therefore be identified according to the methods described above. In a further example the chimeric protein employed in a reporter assay comprises a RANK cytoplasmic domain with deactivated PTM3 and PTM6 motifs. This protein retains a functional PTM5 motif capable of mediating RANK signaling. Accordingly molecules capable of modulating e.g. inhibiting PTM5 mediated signaling can be identified using the methods described herein. Likewise a chimeric protein in which PTM5 and PTM6 motifs are deactivated can be used in a reporter assay to screen for molecules that are capable of modulating e.g. inhibiting PTM3 mediated RANK signaling.

The present invention also features the use of commercial kits for the detection of RANK mediated NF B activation. Non limiting examples of these commercial kits include the NFkappaB p65 p50 Transcription Factor Assays provided by CHEMICON International Inc. Temecula Calif. . The assays employ a double stranded biotinylated oligonucleotide containing a consensus sequence of the NF B binding sites. Host cells comprising a chimeric protein of the invention can be treated with a suitable ligand to induce oligomerization of the protein. The biotinylated oligonucleotide is then mixed with the cellular or nuclear extract of the cells to allow binding of any activated NF B to the consensus sequence. After incubation the mixture is transferred to a streptavidin coated plate. The biotinylated double stranded oligonucleotide bound by active NF B protein is immobilized and any inactive unbound material is washed away. The bound NF B protein is subsequently detected using antibodies. A test agent can be added to the above assay and the level of the bound NF B in the presence of the test agent is compared to a control level e.g. a level measured using the same assay but absent the test agent or in the presence of the test agent but with a different chimeric protein in which the PTM s being investigated is deactivated . A change e.g. reduction in the level of the bound NF B is indicative that the test agent is capable of modulating e.g. inhibiting the RANK mediated NF B activation.

In another aspect the present invention features methods of using binding assays to identify RANK modulators. These methods include detection and comparison of the binding levels between a PTM containing protein and a corresponding TRAF in the presence or absence of a molecule of interest. The PTM motif in the PTM containing protein can bind to the TRAF protein in the absence of the molecule of the interest. A change in the PTM TRAF binding due to the presence of the molecule of interest is indicative of the molecule s ability to modulate e.g. enhance or inhibit the PTM TRAF interaction and therefore the PTM mediated RANK signaling pathway s . Any PTM containing protein may be employed in the binding assays of the present invention. In many embodiments the PTM containing proteins include or consist of an endogenous RANK cytoplasmic domain such as SEQ ID NOs 1 10.

In one embodiment a RANK modulator identified by the present invention is capable of modulating the binding activities between two different PTM motifs and their respective TRAF proteins whereas the two different PTMs are selected from PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6. Such a RANK modulator can be identified by 1 detecting the binding level between a first PTM or a protein comprising the same and a corresponding TRAF in the presence or absence of a molecule of interest and 2 detecting the binding level between a second PTM or a protein comprising the same and a corresponding TRAF in the presence or absence of the same molecule. A change in both binding levels in the presence of the molecule as compared to corresponding binding levels in the absence of the molecule is indicative of the ability of the molecule to modulate two different PTM TRAF interactions and therefore two different RANK signaling pathways. In one example a RANK modulator thus identified can inhibit both PTM5 TRAF and PTM6 TRAF interactions. In another example a RANK modulator thus identified can inhibit both PTM3 TRAF and PTM6 TRAF interactions. In still another example a RANK modulator thus identified can inhibit both PTM3 TRAF and PTM5 TRAF interactions. In many cases a RANK modulator can inhibit or enhance a desired PTM TRAF interaction by at least 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 or 100 .

Exemplary methods suitable for assessing PTM TRAF interactions include but are not limited to surface plasmon resonance e.g. Biacore radioimmune based assays and fluorescence polarization binding assays. In one example competitive assays are used for the identification of PTM TRAF inhibitors. In such an assay TRAF and a candidate molecule are combined with a PTM containing protein under appropriate conditions. Either PTM or TRAF can be labeled with a detectable moiety so that the binding can be measured and the effectiveness of an inhibitor or enhancer determined. The detectable moiety allows for detection by direct or indirect means. Direct means include but are not limited to luminescence chemiluminescence fluorescence radioactivity optical or electron density. Indirect means include but are not limited to enzymes or epitope tags.

A detectable moiety can be a compound or molecule that is distinguishable from the surroundings. The art is replete with examples of detectable moieties that can be used in screening assays. In the present specification the term label is used interchangeably with detectable moiety. A detectable moiety can be a moiety based on luminescence chemiluminescence fluorescence radioactivity enzymatic reactions colorimetric optical or electron density. It is to be understood that the screening assays described herein for identifying test compounds that influence the TRAF PTM interaction may employ one or more of the detectable moieties known in the art. The TRAF or PTM containing protein can be directly or indirectly labeled with a detectable moiety. Such moieties can be attached or labeled to the TRAF or PTM containing protein by any suitable conventional procedure. For instance the TRAF or PTM containing protein comprises functional groups on amino acid side chains that can be reacted with functional groups on a desired moiety to form covalent bonds. Alternatively the TRAF or PTM containing protein can be derivatized to generate or attach a desired reactive functional group. The derivatization can involve attachment of one or more linkers or couplers such as the bifunctional coupling reagents available for attaching molecules to polypeptides.

Molecules that inhibit or prevent the dissociation of the TRAF PTM complex can be identified by forming the complex in the absence of a candidate molecule then adding the candidate molecule to the mixture and changing the conditions so that but for the presence of the candidate molecule TRAF would be released from the complex. The concentration of the free or bound TRAF can then be measured and the dissociation constant of the complex could be determined and compared to a control.

Another method by which molecules can be identified that affect either inhibit or promote the interaction between TRAF and PTM containing protein is the solid phase method in which PTM containing protein is bound and placed in a medium with labeled TRAF. The amount of signal produced by the interaction between TRAF and PTM containing protein is measured in the presence and in the absence of a candidate molecule. Diminished levels of signal in comparison to a control indicate that the candidate molecule inhibits the interaction between TRAF and PTM containing protein. Increased levels of signal in comparison to a control indicate that the candidate molecule promotes the interaction between TRAF and PTM containing protein. In alternative embodiments TRAF can be bound and PTM containing protein labeled. The TRAF or PTM containing protein can be directly or indirectly labeled. For example if the protein is recombinantly produced one can engineer fusion proteins including a polypeptide tag that can facilitate solubility labeling immobilization or detection of the fusion proteins. Polypeptide tags suitable for this purpose include but are not limited to streptavidin tags FLAG tags poly histidine tags glutathione S transferase or Fc fragments.

In many embodiments homogeneous assay formats are used such as fluorescence resonance energy transfer fluorescence polarization time resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer scintillation proximity assays reporter gene assays fluorescence quenched enzyme substrate chromogenic enzyme substrate and electrochemiluminescence. In another aspect the inventive methods utilize heterogeneous assay formats such as enzyme linked immunosorbant assays ELISA or radioimmunoassays.

One such assay is based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer FRET between two fluorescent labels an energy donating long lived chelate label and a short lived organic acceptor. The energy transfer occurs when the two labels are brought in close proximity via the molecular interaction between PTM and TRAF. In a FRET assay for detecting inhibition of the binding of PTM and TRAF europium chelate or cryptate labeled PTM or TRAF serves as an energy donor and streptavidin labeled allophycocyanin APC bound to the appropriate binding partner i.e. PTM containing protein if TRAF is labeled or TRAF if PTM containing protein is labeled serves as an energy acceptor. Once PTM associates with TRAF the donor and acceptor molecules are brought in close proximity and energy transfer occurs generating a fluorescent signal at 665 nm. Inhibitors of the interaction of PTM and TRAF will thus reduce the fluorescent signal whereas enhancers of this interaction would increase it.

Another useful assay is a bioluminescence resonance energy transfer BRET such as that described in Xu et al. P. N. A. S. USA 96 151 1999 . Similar to a FRET assay BRET is based on energy transfer from a bioluminescent donor to a fluorescent acceptor protein. However a green fluorescent protein GFP is used as the acceptor molecule eliminating the need for an excitation light source. Exemplary BRET assays include BRET and BRETfrom Packard BioScience Meriden Conn. . It is understood that PTM and TRAF may be configured in the assay in any workable manner such as alternatively labeling PTM or TRAF with GFP. It is further understood that inhibitors and enhancers of the PTM and TRAF interaction may be identified as described above for the FRET assay.

DELFIA dissociated enhanced lanthanide fluoroimmunoassay is a solid phase assay based on time resolved fluorometry analysis of lanthanide chelates see for example U.S. Pat. No. 4 565 790 . For this type of assay microwell plates are coated with a first protein PTM containing protein or TRAF . The binding partner TRAF or PTM containing protein as the case may be is conjugated to europium chelate or cryptate and added to the plates. After suitable incubation the plates are washed and a solution is added to dissociate europium ions from solid phase bound protein into solution thereby forming highly fluorescent chelates with ligands present in the solution after which the plates are read using a plate reader to detect emission at 615 nm.

Another assay that may be employed is a FlashPlate based assay Packard Instrument Company IL . This assay measures the ability of compounds to inhibit protein protein interactions. FlashPlates are coated with a first protein either TRAF or PTM containing protein then washed to remove excess protein. For the assay compounds to be tested are incubated with the second protein TRAF if the plates are coated with PTM containing protein or PTM containing protein if plates are boated TRAF and I labeled antibody against the second protein is added to the plates. After suitable incubation and washing the amount of radioactivity bound is measured using a scintillation counter.

Further embodiments include the AlphaScreen assay Packard Instrument. Company Meriden Conn. . AlphaScreen technology is an Amplified Luminescent Proximity Homogeneous Assay method utilizing latex microbeads 250 nm diameter containing a photosensitizer donor beads or chemiluminescent groups and fluorescent acceptor molecules acceptor beads . Upon illumination with laser light at 680 nm the photosensitizer in the donor bead converts ambient oxygen to singlet state oxygen. The excited singlet state oxygen molecules diffuse approximately 250 nm one bead diameter before rapidly decaying. If the acceptor bead is in close proximity to the donor bead i.e. by virtue of the interaction of PTM and TRAF the singlet state oxygen molecules reacts with chemiluminescent groups in the acceptor beads which immediately transfer energy to fluorescent acceptors in the same bead. These fluorescent acceptors shift the emission wavelength to 520 620 nm resulting in a detectable signal. Inhibitors of the interaction of PTM and TRAF will thus reduce the shift in emission wavelength whereas enhancers of this interaction would increase it.

In one embodiment a screening method of the present invention comprises the steps of forming a composition comprising a TRAF a PTM containing protein and the test compound assaying for the level of interaction of the TRAF and the PTM containing protein and comparing the level obtained in the presence of the test compound to that obtained in the absence of the test compound such that if the level obtained differs a compound that affects the interaction of the TRAF and the PTM containing protein is identified. Preferably at least one of the TRAF and the PTM containing protein can be labeled with a detectable moiety. One of the TRAF and the PTM containing protein can be soluble and the other can be bound although alternative assay formats are possible and well known. The test compound can be added to the composition after addition of the TRAF and the PTM containing protein before both proteins are added or after one protein is added and before the other is added. The interaction of the TRAF with the PTM containing protein that may be influenced by the test compound includes reciprocal binding of the TRAF and the PTM containing protein. For example a test compound may partially or completely inhibit binding of the TRAF to the PTM containing protein. This partial or complete inhibition of binding can be measured in various ways such as determining the binding constant in the presence and absence of the test compound. In other embodiments the binding affinity and or binding avidity between TRAF and PTM containing protein may be measured with and without the test compound.

The above described methods can be incorporated in high throughput test systems so that large numbers of test molecules can be screened within a short amount of time. The assays can be performed in a variety of formats including protein protein binding assays biochemical screening assays immunoassays or cell based assays. These assay formats are well known in the art. The screening assays of the present invention are amenable to screening of chemical libraries and are suitable for the identification of small molecule drug candidates antibodies peptides peptidomimetics and the like. Chemical libraries include commercially available combinatorial chemistry compound libraries from companies such as but not limited to Sigma Aldrich St. Louis Mo. Arqule Woburn Mass. Enzymed Iowa City Iowa Maybridge Chemical Co. Trevillett Cornwall UK MDS Panlabs Bothell Wash. Pharmacopeia Princeton N.J. and Trega San Diego Calif. .

Moreover combinations of screening assays can be used to find molecules that regulate the biological activity of TRAF PTM interactions. In using combinations of various assays to screen for test compounds it is understood that the assays described herein may be used in any suitable order and combination. For example one embodiment may comprise first determining whether a test compound binds to TRAF or PTM or modulates the binding between TRAF and PTM by using an assay that is amenable to high throughput screening. Test compounds identified in this manner are then added to a biological assay to determine biological effects. By observing the effect that candidate molecules have on the interaction between PTM and TRAF in various binding assays on PTM mediated activity in biological function tests or in cell based screens molecules that are potential therapeutics because they can modulate the interaction between PTM and TRAF are identified. These molecules will be useful in treating or preventing disease or conditions with which PTM or TRAF are implicated.

RANK modulators can also be identified based on rational drug design. One goal of rational drug design is to produce structural analogs of biologically active polypeptides or compounds with which they interact e.g. agonists antagonists inhibitors or binding partners . By creating such analogs it is possible to fashion drugs which are more active or stable than the natural molecules which have different susceptibility to alteration or which may affect the function of various other molecules. In one approach one would generate a three dimensional structure for PTM containing protein e.g. an endogenous RANK cytoplasmic domains or a fragment thereof or TRAF. This could be accomplished by x ray crystallograph NMR computer modeling or by a combination of these approaches. An alternative approach alanine scan involves the random replacement of residues throughout molecule with alanine and the resulting affect on function determined.

It is also possible to isolate a PTM or TRAF specific antibody selected by a functional assay and then solve its crystal structure. In principle this approach yields a pharmacore upon which subsequent drug design can be based. It is possible to bypass protein crystallograph altogether by generating anti idiotypic antibodies to a functional pharmacologically active antibody. As a mirror image of a mirror image the binding site of anti idiotype would be expected to be an analog of the original antigen. The anti idiotype could then be used to identify and isolate peptides from banks of chemically or biologically produced peptides. Selected peptides would then serve as the pharmacore. Anti idiotypes may be generated using any method suitable for producing antibodies using an antibody as the antigen.

In many cases an inhibitor identified by the present invention can inhibit PTM TRAF binding or consequential biological activity e.g. osteoclastogenesis or bone resorption by at least 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 or more. Similarly a stimulator of the present invention can increase the PTM TRAF binding or consequential biological activity by at least 20 30 40 50 or more. Those of ordinary kill in the art will recognize that RANK modulators with different levels of inhibition or enhancement may be useful for different applications e.g. for treatment of different disease states .

RANK modulators of the present invention can be virtually any type of molecule such as small molecules peptide peptide mimics or antibodies. Exemplary antibodies amenable to the present invention include but are not limited to monoclonal antibodies mono specific antibodies poly specific antibodies non specific antibodies humanized antibodies human antibodies single chain antibodies chimeric antibodies synthetic antibodies recombinant antibodies hybrid antibodies Fab F ab Fv scFv Fd dAb or biologically active fragments thereof. In one embodiment an antibody of the present invention includes two or more antigen binding sites each of which recognizes a different respective PTM or its corresponding TRAF protein. Binding of this antibody to these PTMs or their respective TRAFs inhibit two or more PTM mediated RANK signaling pathways selected from the group consisting of PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathway PTM5 mediated RANK signaling pathway and PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathway. In one specific example an antibody of the present invention can bind to at least two PTM motifs selected from PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 and the binding affinity for each motif is at least 10M 10M 10M 10M 10M or stronger.

The present invention further features pharmaceutical compositions comprising one or more RANK modulators identified according to the present invention. Each pharmaceutical composition is capable of modulating e.g. inhibiting at least two RANK mediated pathways selected from the group consisting of PTM3 mediated RANK signaling pathway PTM5 mediated RANK signaling pathway and PTM6 mediated RANK signaling pathway. In one embodiment a pharmaceutical composition of the present invention comprises one or more RANK modulators and is capable of modulating e.g. inhibiting the interactions of at least two different PTMs with their respective TRAF proteins whereas each of the different PTMs is selected from PTM3 PTM5 or PTM6. In one specific example a pharmaceutical composition of the present invention can modulate the interactions of PTM5 and PTM6 with their respective TRAF s . In another specific example a pharmaceutical composition of the present invention can modulate the interactions of PTM3 and PTM6 with their respective TRAF s . In still another specific embodiment a pharmaceutical composition of the present invention can modulate the interactions of PTM3 and PTM5 with their respective TRAF s . Preferably each PTM motif being modulated is a human PTM or comprises SEQ ID NOs 1 10.

A pharmaceutical composition of the present invention typically includes a therapeutically or prophylactically effective amount of one or more RANK modulators and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. Suitable pharmaceutically acceptable carriers include solvents solubilizers fillers stabilizers binders absorbents bases buffering agents lubricants controlled release vehicles diluents emulsifying agents humectants lubricants dispersion media coatings antibacterial or antifungal agents isotonic and absorption delaying agents and the like that are compatible with pharmaceutical administration. The use of such media and agents for pharmaceutically active substances is well known in the art. Supplementary agents can also be incorporated into the composition.

A pharmaceutical composition of the present invention can be formulated to be compatible with its intended route of administration. Examples of routes of administration include parenteral intravenous intradermal subcutaneous oral inhalative transdermal rectal transmucosal topical and systemic administration. In one example the administration is carried out by an implant.

Solutions or suspensions used for parenteral intradermal or subcutaneous application can include the following components a sterile diluent such as water for injection saline solution fixed oils polyethylene glycols glycerine propylene glycol or other synthetic solvents antibacterial agents such as benzyl alcohol or methyl parabens antioxidants such as ascorbic acid or sodium bisulfate chelating agents such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffers such as acetates citrates or phosphates and agents for the adjustment of tonicity such as sodium chloride or dextrose. pH can be adjusted with acids or bases such as hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide. The parenteral preparation can be enclosed in ampoules disposable syringes or multiple dose vials made of glass or plastic.

A pharmaceutical composition of the present invention can be administered to a patient or animal in need thereof in a desired dosage. A suitable dosage may range for example from 5 mg to 100 mg from 15 mg to 85 mg from 30 mg to 70 mg or from 40 mg to 60 mg. Dosages below 5 mg or above 100 mg can also be used. The pharmaceutical composition can be administered in one dose or multiple doses. The doses can be administered at intervals such as once daily once weekly or once monthly.

Toxicity and therapeutic efficacy of a RANK modulator can be determined by standard pharmaceutical procedures in cell culture or experimental animal models. For instance the LD the dose lethal to 50 of the population and the ED the dose therapeutically effective in 50 of the population can be determined. The dose ratio between toxic and therapeutic effects is the therapeutic index and can be expressed as the ratio LD ED. In many cases RANK modulators that exhibit large therapeutic indices are selected.

The data obtained from cell culture assays and animal studies can be used in formulating a range of dosages for use in humans. In one embodiment the dosage is selected within a range of circulating concentrations that exhibit an EDwith little or no toxicity. The dosage may vary within this range depending upon the dosage form employed and the route of administration utilized.

The dosage regimen for the administration of a RANK modulator of the present invention can be determined by the attending physician based on various factors such as the action of the protein the site of pathology the severity of disease the patient s age sex and diet the severity of any inflammation time of administration and other clinical factors. In one example systemic or injectable administration is initiated at a dose which is minimally effective and the dose is increased over a pre selected time course until a positive effect is observed. Subsequently incremental increases in dosage are made limiting to levels that produce a corresponding increase in effect while taking into account any adverse affects that may appear.

Progress of a treatment can be monitored by periodic assessment of disease progression. The progress can be monitored for example by X rays MRI or other imaging modalities synovial fluid analysis or clinical examination. As used herein the terms treat treating and treatment includes curative preventative e.g. prophylactic and palliative treatment.

Diseases amenable to the treatment of the present invention include but are not limited to osteoporosis rheumatoid arthritis cancer induced bone lesions T cell or B cell malignancies or other cancers or bone disorders. In addition familial expansile osteolysis and expansile skeletal hyperphosphatasia have been reported to be associated with abnormal intracellular accumulation of RANK which leads to excessive NF B activity. See Hughes et al. N. G24 45 48 2000 and Whyte and Hughes J. BM. R17 26 29 2002 . Inhibition of the PTM TRAF interactions by using a RANK modulator of the present invention will reduce RANK mediated signaling activities thereby alleviating the diseases caused by irregular activation of RANK mediated pathways.

The following examples are offered by way of illustration and not by way of limitation. Those skilled in the art will recognize that variations of the invention embodied in the examples can be made especially in light of the teachings of the various references cited herein the disclosures of which are incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Chemicals were purchased from Sigma St. Louis Mo. unless indicated otherwise. Synthetic oligonucleotides were purchased from Sigma Genosys The Woodlands Tex. . Blasticidin was from EMD Biosciences Inc San Diego Calif. . Antibody against the external domain of mouse TNFR1 for flow cytometry TNF R1 sc 12746PE was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc Santa Cruz Calif. . Recombinant mouse TNF 410 TRNC 050 was from R D Systems Minneapolis Minn. . The following antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology Inc Beverly Mass. antibodies against I Ba 9242 phospho I Ba 9241 p44 42ERK 9102 phospho p44 42ERK 9101 JNK 9252 phospho JNK 9251 p38 9212 phospho p38 9211 Akt 9272 phospho Akt 9271 AFX 9472 phospho AFX 9471 phospho GSK3 9331 GSK3 9332 phospho FKHR FKHRL1 9464 FKHR 9462 phospho BAD 9297 and BAD 9292 .

A chimeric cDNA comprising mouse TNFR1 external domain from AA 1 to AA 210 linked in frame to the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of mouse RANK AA 210 to AA 625 was constructed using standard molecular cloning techniques. The amino acid sequences of mouse TNFR1 and RANK genes have Entrez accession numbers NP035739 SEQ ID NO 41 and NP033425 SEQ ID NO 32 respectively. cDNA fragment encoding mouse TNFR1 external domain was amplified by RT PCR using total RNA isolated from mouse bone marrow macrophages BMMs and a pair of primers containing XbaI sites. The TNFR1 cDNA fragment was then subcloned into pBluescript II SK cloning vector Stratagene La Jolla Calif. at XbaI site resulting in a plasmid named SK TNFR1. cDNA encoding the RANK transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains was also amplified by RT PCR using total RNA from mouse BMMs with a forward primer containing SpeI site and a reverse primer containing BamHI site. The RANK cDNA fragment was then subcloned into SK TNFR1 between SpeI and BamHI giving rise to a plasmid named SK TNFR1 RANK. The orientation and sequence of the chimeric cDNA was confirmed by sequencing.

The retrovirus vector pMX puro Onishi et al. Mol. Cell Biol. 18 3871 3879 1998 and the Plat E packaging cells Morita et. al. Gene Therapy 7 1063 1066 2000 were used. The chimeric cDNA TNFR1 RANK from SK TNFR1 RANK was subcloned into pMX puro to generate plasmid construct named pMX puro TNFR1 RANK. Plat E cells were cultured in DMEM with 10 heat inactivated FBS as described in Morita et al. supra . pMX puro TNFR1 RANK was transiently transfected into Plat E cells using Lipofectamine Plus Invitrogen Carlsbad Calif. . Virus supernatant was collected at 48 72 and 96 h after transfection.

Bone marrow cells were isolated from long bones of 4 8 week old TNFR1R2 double knockout mice The Jackson Laboratory Bar Harbor Me. or wild type mice Harlan Industries Indianapolis Ind. as described in Feng et al. J. C. I107 1137 1144 2001 . BMMs were prepared by culturing isolated bone marrow cells in MEM containing 10 heat inactivated FBS in the presence of 0.1 volume of culture supernatant of M CSF producing cells for 2 days as previously described in Takeshita et al. J. BM. R15 1477 1488 2000 . Cells were then infected with virus for 24 hours in the presence of 0.1 volume of culture supernatant of M CSF producing cells and 8 g ml polybrene. Cells were further cultured in the presence of M CSF and 2 g ml puromycin for selection and expansion of transduced cells. Selected cells were subsequently used for various studies.

Retrovirally infected BMMs were cultured in 24 well tissue culture plates 1 10cells well in MEM containing 10 heat inactivated FBS in the presence of 0.01 volume of culture supernatant of M CSF producing cells final M CSF concentration is 22 ng ml and 100 ng of GST RANKL Lam et al. J. Clin. Invest. 106 1481 1488 2000 . In osteoclastogenesis assays involving the use of the chimeric receptor TNF was added at concentrations as indicated in individual assays. Osteoclast began to form on day 3 and cultures were stained for tartrate resistant acid phosphatase TRAP activity on day 5 using a commercial kit Sigma 387 A . In other assays the cultures were treated with different factors as indicated in individual assays after osteoclast formation and then continued for 14 more hours. The cultures were then stained for TRAP activity. Survived osteoclasts were determined as those cells with strong TRAP activity more than 3 nuclei and intact plasma membrane.

To perform bone resorption assays osteoclasts were generated on whale dentin slices from infected or uninfected BMMs as described above. Dentin slices were harvested at day 9. Cells were removed from the dentin slices with 0.25 M ammonium hydroxide and mechanical agitation. Dentin slices were then subjected to scanning electron microscopy SEM .

Infected BMMs up to 1 10cells were suspended in 200 l PBS Azide. Cells were then blocked with 1 g 2.4G2 antibody Unkeless J. E. M150 580 596 1979 for 30 min on ice. Under dim light 20 l of TNFR1 antibody conjugated with phycoerythrin Santa Cruz Calif. sc 12746PE or control IgG was added to the cell suspension and cells were incubated on ice for 30 min. Cells were washed twice with 1 ml cold PBS Azide and resuspended in 300 l cold PBS Azide. 200 l cold 0.5 paraformaldehyde solution was added to fix the cells. Flow cytometric analysis was performed using a Becton Dickinson FACSan Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems Mountain View Calif. .

Mutations were generated in SK TNFR1 RANK using the QuickChange Site directed Mutagenesis Kit Stratagene . To mutate the six putative TRAF binding motifs PTM the following oligonucleotides were used. For PTM 1 5 GTGTGTGAAGGTGTCGTAGTATTGTCTCTGGACGACAAGATGGTTCC 3 SEQ ID NO 11 and 5 GGAACCATCTTGTCGTCCAGAGACAATACGACACCTTCACACAC 3 SEQ ID NO 12 . For PTM2 5 GAGTACACGGACCGGCTCACGAAGCTTACGA CTGGTTCACTG 3 SEQ ID NO 13 and 5 CAGTGAACCAGTCGTAAGGTTCGTG AGCCGGTCCGTGTACTC 3 SEQ ID NO 14 . For PTM3 5 GCAAATCTATACC CCCATGGAACGACCTCCTGGAAGTGGGG 3 SEQ ID NO 15 and 5 CCCCAC TTCCAGGAGGTCGTTCCATAGGGGTATAGATTTGC 3 SEQ ID NO 16 . For PTM4 GACATCATCGTGGTGTTTCTCACCAACTCCACGAACGACGGCCCGGGTTC 3 SEQ ID NO 17 and 5 GGAACCCGGGCCGTCGTTCGTGGAGTTGGTGAGAA ACAGCACGATGATGTC 3 SEQ ID NO 18 . For PTM5 5 CCCGTGGGCCGC CTTCTGAACGACGACTCGCTGGCACAC 3 SEQ ID NO 19 and 5 GTGTG CCAGCGAGTCGTCGTTCAGAAGGCGGCCCACGGG 3 SEQ ID NO 20 . For PTM6 5 GGGACATCGCGGCTGCTGAACGACAACGCTGGGGCGCAG 3 SEQ ID NO 21 and 5 CTGCGCCCCAGTTGTCGTTCAGCAGCCGCGATGTCCC 3 SEQ ID NO 22 . The intended mutations are indicated by lower case letters in these oligonucleotides. The mutated sites were confirmed by sequencing and other regions in the chimeric cDNA were sequenced to confirm that no mutations were introduced by PCR amplification during the mutagenesis. The mutant chimeric cDNAs were then subcloned into pMX puro plasmids as described above for virus preparation.

BMMs infected with retrovirus or control BMMs uninfected were cultured in serum free MEM in the absence of M CSF for 16 h before treatment with RANKL or TNF for various times as indicated in individual experiments. For assays involving osteoclasts BMMs were treated with M CSF 22 ng ml and RANKL 100 ng ml for 4 days to stimulate osteoclast formation. After osteoclasts were formed the cultures were then treated with PBS or RANKL for 2 or 5 hours. Cells were washed twice with ice cold phosphate buffered saline PBS and then lysed in buffer containing 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 150 mM NaCl 1 mM EDTA 1 mM EGTA 1 Triton X 100 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate 1 mM 3 glycerophosphate 1 mM NaVO 1 mM NaF and 1 protease inhibitor cocktail 1 Sigma P 2850 and 1 protease inhibitor cocktail 2 Sigma P 5726 . 40 g of cell lysates were boiled in the presence of SDS sample buffer 0.5 M Tris HCl pH 6.8 10 w v SDS 10 glycerol 0.05 w v bromophenol blue for 5 min and loaded for electrophoresis on 10 SDS PAGE. Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes Cat 162 0147 from Bio Rad Hercules Calif. using a semi dry blotter Bio Rad . Membranes were blocked in blocking solution 5 non fat dry milk in TBS containing 0.1 Tween 20 for 1 h to prevent nonspecific binding and then washed three times with TBS T TBS containing 0.1 Tween 20 . Membranes were incubated primary antibodies in TBS T containing 5 bovine albumin Sigma Cat A 7030 overnight at 4 C. Next day membranes were then washed three times with TBS T and incubated with secondary antibody in TBS T containing 5 non fat dry milk for 1 h. Membranes were washed extensively and enhanced chemiluminescence ECL detection assay was performed using SuperSignal West Dura kit from Pierce Rockford Ill. .

Sequence analysis was performed using the Genetic Computer Group Madison Wis. sequence analysis software.

To delineate functional motifs in the RANK cytoplasmic domain mediating osteoclast differentiation and function a chimeric receptor comprising mouse TNFR1 external domain AA 1 to AA 210 linked to the transmembrane and intracellular domains of mouse RANK AA 210 to AA 625 was developed . Given that both TNFR1 and RANK belong to the same family of the cytokines and that they are both activated by trimerization the TNF induced trimerization of the chimeric receptor is postulated to be sufficient to activate RANK intracellular signaling pathways required for the osteoclast formation and or function .

To determine whether the chimeric receptor is capable of mediating osteoclast formation and function the above described chimeric receptor was expressed in primary BMMs using a retroviral system . Given that TNF is also implicated in osteoclast formation and function BMMs from TNFR1 and R2 double knockout mice TNFR1R2 were used to eliminate the possibility of signaling through TNF receptors. BMMs derived from TNFR1R2 mice were infected with the retrovirus encoding the chimeric receptor and the cells expressing the chimera were selected with 1 g ml puromycin for 2 or 4 days. Flow cytometric analysis with antibody against the external domain of TNFR1 demonstrated that the chimera was not only expressed on the cell surface but also the surface expression levels of the chimera were increased with the selection time .

To determine whether the chimeric receptor is capable of mediating osteoclast differentiation infected BMMs expressing the chimera were treated with M CSF 22 ng ml M CSF 22 ng ml plus RANKL 100 ng ml or M CSF 22 ng ml plus TNF 10 ng ml . While infected BMMs treated with M CSF alone remained in macrophage lineage those treated with M CSF and RANKL formed osteoclasts indicating that the endogenous RANK in the infected cells is functional . When infected BMMs were treated with M CSF and TNF they also formed osteoclasts confirming that the chimeric receptor is working . As a negative control uninfected BMMs failed to form osteoclasts in response to M CSF and TNF treatment . Notably the infected cell culture treated with M CSF alone also contained few TRAP positive cells . This might be a result of over expression of the chimera in a few BMMs since over expression of TNFR family members can lead to the self activation of their signaling pathways. Functionally these TRAP positive cells may not be regarded as osteoclasts because the high power view of the culture indicates that they were still mononuclear. In addition as shown in these TRAP positive mononuclear cells failed to form any pits in the resorption assays. Thus the formation of few TRAP positive mononuclear cells in this culture will not undermine the chimera s potential as a tool to study RANK signaling. In TNF at the concentration of 10 ng ml was used. Subsequent studies showed that lower TNF concentrations as low as 1 ng ml were still able to mediate osteoclast formation.

To examine whether osteoclasts generated using the chimera strategy are capable of resorbing bone bone resorption assays were performed . Osteoclasts generated using the chimera approach resorbed bone as efficiently as those formed using the endogenous RANK . Taken together these data indicate that a chimera comprising TNFR1 external domain linked to the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of RANK is able to mediate osteoclast formation and function using TNF as a surrogate of RANKL. This chimera can serve as a useful tool for studying RANK signaling in osteoclast differentiation and function.

The chimeric receptor approach described in Example 2 was used to elucidate RANK cytoplasmic motifs that mediate osteoclast formation and function. RANK cytoplasmic domain contains six putative TRAF binding motifs PTM that have been proposed to be able to initiate RANK signaling PTM1 ILLMTREE SEQ ID NO 23 PTM2 PSQPS SEQ ID NO 24 PTM3 PFQEP SEQ ID NO 1 PTM4 VYVSQTSQE SEQ ID NO 25 PTM5 PVQEET SEQ ID NO 2 PTM6 PVQEQG SEQ ID NO 3 . As shown in these PTMs were mutated to VVVLSLDD SEQ ID NO 26 LTNLT SEQ ID NO 27 LWNDL SEQ ID NO 28 LFLTNSTND SEQ ID NO 29 LLNDDS SEQ ID NO 30 and LLNDNA SEQ ID NO 31 respectively. These mutants were employed to investigate the role of the PTMs in osteoclast formation and function. The location and sequence of each PTM as well as the mutations introduced in these PTMs are highlighted in . To minimize the potential effect of the point mutations on the 3 dimensional structure of the RANK intracellular domain each amino acid in a PTM was mutated to an amino acid with similar chemical characteristics e.g. similar chemical structure polarity and charge .

To address the issue a mutant P1 6 was generated in which all six PTMs are mutated according to . Viruses encoding P1 6 mutant or the wild type chimera were prepared. Flow cytometric analysis showed that P1 6 mutant and the wild type chimeras were expressed at similar levels on cell surface of BMMs infected with these viruses data not shown . As shown in when infected cells were treated with 22 ng M CSF and 5 ng TNF the wild type chimera is capable of mediating osteoclast formation but P1 6 failed to do so top panels . These data indicate that some of the sites are functionally redundant. Moreover when 10 ng ml TNF was used for osteoclastogenesis assay P1 6 resulted in a few TRAP positive cells right bottom panel . This may be due to the possibility that the introduced mutations are not able to completely block the binding of downstream signaling molecules such as TRAF proteins. Taken together these two sets of data indicate that some of the PTMs are functionally redundant in mediating osteoclast formation.

To identify the functional RANK cytoplasmic motifs two mutant chimeric receptors were generated namely M1 and M2 . In M1 PTMs 1 2 and 3 are mutated while in M2 PTMs 4 5 and 6 are mutated. Each PTM is mutated according to . When M1 and M2 were used to repeat the osteoclastogenesis assays both mutants formed osteoclasts suggesting that some of the three non mutated PTMs in both M1 and M2 are functional. Given that M1 showed a higher capacity to form osteoclasts than M2 implying that more than one PTM among the three non mutated PTMs in M1 PTMs 4 5 and 6 are probably capable of mediating osteoclast formation.

Based on the above data six more mutants W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 and W6 were prepared . In each of these mutants only one PTM is not mutated and each PTM is mutated according to . BMMs infected with virus encoding these mutant chimeras were analyzed by flow cytometric analysis to confirm that all mutant chimeras were expressed at similar levels on cell surface . The mutant chimeras W1 W6 were then used to perform the osteoclastogenesis experiment with 22 ng ml M CSF and 5 ng ml TNF . Under these conditions while W1 W2 and W4 failed to form TRAP positive cells W3 W5 and W6 were capable of forming some TRAP positive cells indicating that PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 are functional sites. The osteoclastogenesis assay was repeated with higher TNF concentrations 10 ng ml . As shown in while W1 W2 and W4 gave rise to a culture similar to P1 6 culture W3 W5 and W6 formed much more and bigger osteoclasts than P1 6 mutant. These data demonstrated that PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 are functional RANK motifs in mediating osteoclast formation. Moreover both sets of the assays suggested that PTM5 and PTM6 might be more potent than PTM3 in mediating osteoclast differentiation .

To determine whether PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 are able to mediate bone resorption bone resorption assays were performed with BMMs infected with virus encoding the wild type chimera W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 W6 or P1 6 . In this bone resorption assay osteoclasts were generated in the presence of 22 ng ml M CSF and 5 ng ml TNF . No bone resorption pits were detected from the W1 W2 W4 and P1 6 since these mutants were not able to mediate osteoclast differentiation under the condition 22 ng ml M CSF and 5 ng ml TNF . Dentin slices from the wild type chimera W3 W5 and W6 cultures showed resorption activities revealing that the three RANK motifs PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 are also capable of activating osteoclast bone resorption. Moreover W3 gave rise to fewer bone resorption pits than W5 and W6 which is consistent with the osteoclastogenesis assay showing that W3 is less potent in modulating osteoclast differentiation than W5 and W6 .

RANK mediates osteoclast formation and or function by activating various intracellular signaling pathways including NF B JNK ERK and p38. This example investigated whether PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 motifs are implicated in activation of these signaling pathways by performing Western analysis with antibodies against phosphorylated I B JNK ERK or p38 as previously described in Wei et al. J. B. C277 6622 6630 2002 .

First TNFR1R2 BMMs were infected with virus encoding either the wild type chimera or the mutant P1 6. Infected cells were then treated with TNF for various times and the activation of the signaling pathways was determined by Western analysis . While the wild type chimera induced the phosphorylation of I B with 5 min treatment lanes 1 and 2 P1 6 mutant failed to do so lanes 5 and 6 indicating that some of the PTMs are implicated in activation of the I B NF B pathway. In addition the wild type chimera also led to a high level phosphorylation of JNK lanes 1 and 2 and ERK lanes 1 and 2 in response to TNF treatment. In contrast the TNF induced phosphorylation of JNK and ERK was profoundly reduced in the assays with P1 6 mutant lanes 4 and 5 revealing that one or more of PTMs mutated in P1 6 plays a role in activating the JNK and ERK pathway. Finally a similar result was also obtained for p38 phosphorylation . Taken together these data indicate that the PTMs 3 5 or 6 may regulate osteoclast formation function by activating NF B JNK ERK and or p38 signaling pathways.

Next each of the three functional RANK motifs was examined to determine which motif can activate these signaling pathways in BMMs. Western analysis was repeated with P1 6 W3 W5 and W6 mutants respectively . As shown in while P1 6 mutant failed to lead to I B phosphorylation with 5 min treatment lanes 1 and 2 W3 W5 and W6 all induced I B phosphorylation lanes 4 and 5 lanes 7 and 8 lanes 10 and 11 revealing that all three RANK motifs are able to activate I B NF B pathway. Moreover W3 can significantly activate three MAPK pathways namely JNK lanes 4 5 and 6 ERK lanes 4 5 and 6 and p38 lanes 4 5 and 6 pathways. In addition show that W5 can induce p38 activation lanes 7 8 and 9 . In summary PFQEP PTM3 SEQ ID NO 1 is involved in the activation of I B and three MAPK pathways PVQEET PTM5 SEQ ID NO 2 activates I B and p38 pathways and PVQEQG PTM6 SEQ ID NO 3 is capable of activating I B pathway .

RANKL has been shown to play pivotal roles in regulating various biological processes such as bone homeostasis immune function and mammary gland development. In addition it has also been established that RANKL exerts its biological effects by binding to its receptor RANK a member of the TNF receptor superfamily. However the RANK initiated intracellular signaling pathways in the various biological functions in response to RANKL ligation have not been fully defined.

Previous studies were mostly carried out either by in vitro binding assays or by using transformed cells irrelevant to osteoclasts dendritic cells or mammary gland epithelial cells. See e.g. Hsu et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96 3540 3545 1999 Darnay et al. 1998 supra Wong et al. supra Kim et al. supra Darnay et al. 1999 supra and Galibert et al. 1998 supra . Therefore the functional relevance of the data obtained from these studies to the three major biological processes has largely remained unknown. Moreover it is controversial which TRAF proteins interact with RANK and which regions of the RANK interact with these TRAFs.

The above described Examples focused on identification of structural determinants in RANK cytoplasmic domain that are involved in osteoclast formation and function. In order to obtain physiologically relevant data structure function study of RANK was carried out in primary osteoclast precursor cells i.e. primary BMMs. This was successfully achieved by a combination of efficient transduction of genes into primary BMMs using retrovirus technology with the creation of a chimeric receptor approach Feng et al. E143 4868 4874 2002 . Moreover the other strength of these Examples is that a special emphasis was placed on identifying RANK cytoplasmic motifs that regulate cellular functions such as osteoclast formation and bone resorption. RANK contains either of three distinct motifs PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 were revealed to be capable of mediating osteoclast formation and function .

PTM3 has been shown to be a TRAF6 binding motif Ye et al. supra . The above described Examples revealed that RANK contains two more motifs PTM5 and PTM6 that are able to promote osteoclast formation and function. PTM5 and PTM6 seem to be more potent in promoting osteoclast formation than PTM3 . PTM5 and PTM6 motifs are located in the functional RANK regions revealed by Armstrong et al. supra .

Upon the identification of the functional RANK motifs the above Examples further examined the capacity of these motifs to activate several known signaling pathways initiated by RANK. The data showed that while all three motifs are able to activate I B NF B pathway they differ in their ability to activate MAPK pathways indicating that these functional RANK motifs can play distinct roles in initiating intracellular signaling pathways. Research is underway to functionally identify TRAF proteins that specifically bind to these RANK motifs in transmitting intracellular signaling in osteoclast formation and function.

The above osteoclastogenesis assays also demonstrated that the RANK motifs exhibited distinct capacity in promoting osteoclast formation in the presence of M CSF . Both PTM5 and PTM6 appear to be more potent than PTM3 in forming osteoclasts. The signaling data further revealed that these motifs differ in their ability to mediate signaling pathways . In particular they can activate different MAPK pathways. These data implicate that PTM5 and PTM6 may activate other yet unidentified pathways to promote osteoclast formation. Future studies aimed at addressing this issue may provide more insights into the signaling mechanism underling the RANKL induced osteoclast formation.

RANKL has been known to play an important role in stimulating osteoclast survival. Consistent with the notion OPG the decoy receptor for RANKL can inhibit osteoclast survival. RANKL has been postulated to exert its anti apoptotic effects at least in part by activating Akt protein kinase B Akt PKB through a signaling complex involving TNF receptor associated factor 6 TRAF6 and c Src. In this model RANKL induces TRAF6 c Src and RANK to form a trimer. Within this trimeric complex TRAF6 induces the activation of c Src which in turn activates phosphotidylinositol 3 kinase PI3 kinase . The activated PI3 kinase then leads to the activation of Akt PKB. Akt PKB may utilize distinct downstream pathways GSK3 FKHR FOXO1a BAD or AFX FOXO4 to regulate cell survival. However the precise downstream signaling pathway activated by Akt PKB to regulate osteoclast survival has still remained elusive.

As demonstrated in the above Examples three RANK cytoplasmic motifs namely PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 are involved in the regulation of osteoclast formation and function. These three motifs activate different signaling pathways. PTM3 activates NF B JNK ERK and p38 PTM5 triggers the activation of NF B and p38 and PTM6 activates only NF B. However the specific RANK cytoplasmic motifs and downstream signaling pathways involved in osteoclast survival have not been functionally identified.

In this Example PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 were evaluated for their involvements in modulating osteoclast survival. PTM3 was shown to be highly potent in promoting osteoclast survival in part by activating Akt PBK pathway although this motif seems to play a less prominent role in osteoclast formation and function. The downstream effector AFX FOXO4 was also identified as being activated by Akt PKB in osteoclast survival.

The Chimeric Receptor Approach Permits the Investigation of RANK Signaling Involved in Osteoclast Survival

The above Examples describe a chimeric receptor approach for delineating functional motifs in the RANK cytoplasmic domain mediating osteoclast differentiation and function. The chimeric receptor comprises mouse TNFR1 external domain linked to the transmembrane and intracellular domains of mouse RANK. In order to investigate the role of the six PTMs in osteoclast survival mature osteoclasts expressing the six mutants W1 W6 were obtained. However as illustrated above while W3 W5 and W6 can promote osteoclast formation W1 W2 and W4 are incapable of mediating osteoclast formation. However the chimeric receptor approach possesses a unique switch feature that allows us to overcome the problem. As shown in infected BMMs not only express a chimeric receptor but also retain endogenous RANK. As a result infected BMMs can be treated with RANKL and M CSF to stimulate osteoclast formation. Once osteoclasts are formed M CSF and RANKL are removed and the cultures are then treated with TNF alone to assess the impact of the expressed chimeric receptor on osteoclast survival .

To determine whether the chimeric receptor approach indeed has the switch feature and whether RANK motifs mediating osteoclast survival are among the six PTMs uninfected BMMs as well as infected BMMs expressing WT or P1 6 were treated with M CSF 22 ng ml and RANKL 100 ng ml to stimulate osteoclast formation . 4 days later osteoclasts were formed and a representative osteoclast culture is shown in top panel . Then M CSF and RANKL were removed and the cultures were treated with vehicle PBS M CSF RANKL or TNF for 14 hours . Osteoclasts expressing wild type chimera WT survived in response to M CSF RANKL or TNF . As a negative control osteoclasts derived from uninfected BMMs failed to survive in response to TNF . These data indicate that the chimeric receptor approach does possess the unique switch feature. In addition while osteoclasts expressing WT survived with stimulation of TNF those expressing P1 6 failed to do so indicating that RANK motifs mediating osteoclast survival are indeed among the six PTMs. shows the quantification of the data in .

To identify the functional RANK cytoplasmic motifs the osteoclast survival assay shown in was repeated with mutant chimeras W1 W6 . WT was also used as a positive control and P1 6 as a negative control. In these assays after the removal of M CSF and RANKL osteoclast cultures were treated with either PBS or TNF for 14 hours. As shown in while W1 W2 and W4 failed to promote osteoclast survival W3 W5 and W6 were able to mediate osteoclast survival. The data shown in are quantified in . The survival assays also showed that the potency of these motifs in promoting osteoclast survival is in the order of W3 W5 W6. As shown in in W3 all PTMs except PTM3 are mutated. Similarly in W5 and W6 all PTMs except PTM5 and PTM6 respectively are mutated. Thus PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 appear to be the functional motifs capable of promoting osteoclast survival. PTM3 PTM5 and PTM6 are hereinafter referred to as Motif 1 Motif 2 and Motif 3 respectively.

To further demonstrate that these three RANK motifs play functional role in osteoclast survival the osteoclast survival assay was repeated with the mutant chimeric receptors P3 P5 and P6 . In P3 PTM3 Motif 1 is mutated. In P5 PTM5 Motif 2 is mutated. In P6 PTM6 Motif 3 is mutated. shows osteoclast cultures obtained from the survival assays and the data are quantified in . Consistent with the observation that PTM3 Motif 1 played a predominant role in modulating osteoclast survival P3 exhibited very low capacity in modulating osteoclast survival. In contrast P5 and P6 had considerable ability to mediate osteoclast survival indicating that PTM5 Motif 2 and PTM6 Motif 3 are less potent than PTM3 Motif 1 in mediating osteoclast survival.

PTM3 Motif 1 but not PTM5 Motif 2 or PTM6 Motif 3 Activates the Akt PKB Pathway to Promote Osteoclast Survival

RANK can activate at least six major pathways NF B JNK ERK p38 Akt PKB and NFATc1. Among them NF B ERK and Akt PKB are capable of modulating osteoclast survival. As shown above PTM3 Motif 1 can activate NF B and ERK while PTM5 Motif 2 and PTM6 Motif 3 are able to activate NF B. To determine whether these three functional RANK motifs can also activate the Akt PKB pathway Western analysis was performed with an antibody against phosphorylated Akt PKB.

TNFR1R2 BMMs were first infected with virus encoding either the wild type chimera or the mutant P1 6. Infected cells were then treated with TNF for various times and the activation of the Akt PKB signaling pathway was monitored by Western analysis . While the wild type chimera induced the phosphorylation of Akt PKB with 15 and 30 min treatment lanes 1 2 and 3 P1 6 mutant failed to do so lanes 4 5 and 6 indicating that certain PTM s is involved in the activation of the Akt PKB pathway. Western analysis was then repeated with W3 W5 and W6 mutants. As shown in W3 induced Akt PKB phosphorylation with 15 and 30 min treatment lanes 1 2 and 3 while W5 and W6 failed to do so lanes 4 9 suggesting that PTM3 Motif 1 is primarily responsible for the activation of the Akt pathway.

Similar assays were repeated in mature osteoclasts to determine whether Akt PKB can be activated by RANKL. Since most osteoclasts died after 16 or 8 hour starvation in MEM without serum M CSF or RANKL a different experimental strategy as depicted in was employed. First BMMs were treated with M CSF and RANKL to promote osteoclast formation. Once osteoclasts were formed cells were either lysed immediately or lysed after having been treated with vehicle PBS or RANKL for 2 or 5 hours . The lysate were then used for Western analysis for the state of Akt PKB activation phosphorylation . As shown in Akt PKB phosphorylation is decreased more dramatically in control cultures lanes 2 and 4 than in the cells treated with RANKL lanes 3 and 5 indicating that RANKL plays a role in activating Akt PKB in mature osteoclasts.

It has been established that Akt PKB targets various downstream effectors such as GSK3 glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta BAD BCL2 antagonist of cell death FKHR FOXO1a forkhead box O1A rhabdomyosarcoma and AFX FOXO4 ALL1 fused gene from chromosome X . To determine which downstream effector s the Akt PKB pathway targets to promote osteoclast formation Western analysis was performed with antibodies against phosphorylated forms of GSK3 BAD FKHR FOXO1a and AFX FOXO4. As shown in RANKL treatment activated the phosphorylation of AFX FOXO4 lanes 2 and 3 but not BAD FKHR FOXO1a and GSK3 in BMMs.

The activation of AFX FOXO4 was also investigated in mature osteoclasts. BMMs were treated with M CSF and RANKL to promote osteoclast formation as described in . Once osteoclasts were formed cells were either lysed immediately or lysed after having been treated with vehicle PBS or RANKL for 2 or 5 hours. The lysates were then used for Western analysis for the state of GSK3 BAD FKHR FOXO1a and AFX FOXO4 activation phosphorylation . As shown in AFX FOXO4 phosphorylation was decreased more dramatically in control cultures lanes 2 and 4 the upper band represents the phosphorylated form of AFX FOXO4 than in the cells treated with RANKL lanes 3 and 5 indicating that RANKL plays a role in activating AFX FOXO4 in mature osteoclasts. In contrast RANKL failed to induce the activation of BAD FKHR FOXO1a or GSK3 in mature osteoclasts.

The control of osteoclast lifespan has been recognized as a critical regulatory factor in bone remodeling and alteration in osteoclast lifespan is attributed to the pathogenesis of bone disorders including postmenopausal osteoporosis. Since the discovery of RANKL RANKL has been shown to play important roles not only in osteoclast formation and function but also in osteoclast survival. However the molecular mechanism by which RANKL regulates osteoclast survival has not been fully understood.

RANKL exerts its functions by binding to and activating its receptor RANK which recruits various TRAF proteins through specific motifs in the cytoplasmic domain upon activation. In the above Examples three RANK cytoplasmic motifs Motif 1 Motif 2 and Motif 3 were identified to be involved in the regulation of osteoclast formation and function. This Example further investigated the molecular mechanism by which RANKL regulates osteoclast survival and identified RANK motifs that are responsible for osteoclast survival. It revealed that the same three motifs are involved in osteoclast survival. As noted above Motif 1 is highly potent in mediating osteoclast survival although it plays a less prominent role in osteoclast differentiation and function compare with . In contrast Motif 2 and Motif 3 are highly capable of mediating osteoclast formation and function but are less effective in promoting osteoclast survival.

Akt PKB is a potent factor regulating osteoclast survival in response to a variety of stimuli including RANKL IL 1 and TNF . It has been reported that RANKL activates Akt PKB through a signaling complex involving TRAF6 and c Src Wong et al. MC4 1041 1049 1999 . To investigate the molecular mechanism by which the three RANK motifs modulate osteoclast survival these motifs were examined to determine whether they are capable of activating Akt PKB. The data indicated that Motif 1 but not Motif 2 or Motif 3 is able to activate Akt PKB. The above Examples demonstrate that Motif 2 and Motif 3 can activate NF B pathway while Motif 1 can activate both NF B and ERK pathways. Because both NF B and ERK are mediators of osteoclast survival these data explain why Motif 1 appears to be more potent than Motif 2 and Motif 3 in promoting osteoclast survival. This theory is summarized in FIG. 19.

It has been established that Akt PKB may utilize distinct downstream effectors such as p21CIP1 MDM2 TSC2 eNOS GSK3 FKHR FOXO1a BAD and AFX FOXO4 to regulate a variety of cellular processes such as cell proliferation growth and survival. Among these diverse effectors GSK3 3 FKHR FOXO1a BAD and AFX FOXO4 are believed to play roles in cell survival. This study further determined that AFX FOXO4 is the downstream effector activated by Akt PKB in promoting osteoclast survival.

AFX ALL1 fused gene from chromosome X also known as FOXO4 is a transcription factor belonging to the Forkhead transcription factor superfamily. AFX was identified as a mammalian homolog of the Forkhead transcription factor daf 16 in . The Forkhead superfamily contains more than 100 members identified in different species and about 0.40 mammalian homologs have been identified. Members of this superfamily are characterized by the presence of a highly conserved DNA binding domain known as the Forkhead box which was named based on its homology to the DNA binding domain of the Drosophila homeotic Forkhead protein and the hepatic nuclear factor 3 HNF 3 transcription factors. Given that members of the Forkhead superfamily are highly divergent outside of the Forkhead box Forkhead transcription factors have been further categorized into 17 subfamilies ranging from FOXA to FOXQ.

AFX belongs to the FOXO subfamily which comprises several other members including FOXO1a FKHR and FOXO3a FKHRL1 . The FOXO factors have been shown to play important roles in cell proliferation and survival. Activation of a FOXO factor is sufficient to induce the expression of proapoptotic genes and trigger apoptosis in cells of hematopoietic origin. Phosphorylation of a FOXO factor by Akt PKB also causes its retention in cytoplasm and or its translocation from the nucleus to cytoplasm resulting in the inhibition of the transcriptional activation of the proapoptotic genes. Although FOXO1a FKHR and FOXO4 AFX are downstream targets of Akt PKB only AFX FOXO4 appears to be involved in RANKL mediated osteoclast survival. It is speculated that AFX FOXO4 can activate apoptosis by inducing the expression of the BCL 6 transcriptional repressor Tang et al. J. B. C277 14255 14265 2002 . The BCL 6 promoter contains multiple binding sites for AFX FOXO4. BCL 6 then regulates apoptosis by regulating the expression of BCL XL an anti apoptotic protein . It has also been noted that macrophages isolated from BCL 6 exhibited enhanced survival supporting the potential role of BCL 6 in AFX induced osteoclast precursor survival. In line with this theory this Example indicates that AFX FOXO4 is phosphorylated in response to RANKL stimulation.

It is also noted that the AFX FOXO4 mice are viable and no apparent abnormalities have been identified. However it is not clear whether the skeletal development and especially osteoclast survival in these mice have been carefully examined. Given that AFX FOXO4 pathway may represent only one of numerous pathways implicated in regulating osteoclast survival AFX FOXO4 osteoclasts are likely to exhibit only subtle difference in osteoclast survival as compared to wild type controls. As a result any potential in vivo phenotypes might only be detectable in older mice. Thus a careful examination of the AFX FOXO4 mice is needed to determine whether any abnormality in osteoclast survival results from the deletion of the gene for AFX FOXO4.

The foregoing description of the invention provides illustration and description but is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise one disclosed. Modifications and variations are possible consistent with the above teachings or may be acquired from practice of the invention. Thus it is noted that the scope of the invention is defined by the claims and their equivalents.

