---

title: Distribution of content
abstract: Among other things, publishers of digital content are enabled each to define, for each of one or more digital content items, a style in which the digital content item is to be presented to a user and a condition under which the user may have the digital content item presented. The digital content items are stored in a content library, the styles and conditions associated with the digital content items are stored in a server. Each of the digital content items is enabled to be presented to users within presentation contexts that are accessible to the users and controlled by presentation context providers. The presentation of the digital content items includes obtaining the digital content items from the server and controlling the presentation to occur under the conditions and in the styles defined by the publishers.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07925973&OS=07925973&RS=07925973
owner: Brightcove, Inc.
number: 07925973
owner_city: Cambridge
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050812
---
The well publicized growth in the use of the Internet generally has been paralleled by an equivalent growth in the number of publishers creating text and graphical content for the Internet. Unlike past mass mediums such as that of television radio and newspaper where it can be cost prohibitive to reach large numbers of consumers the Internet has enabled any publisher to deliver content anywhere in the world at virtually no cost. This radical shift in the economics of text and graphical publishing resulted in tens of millions of websites. While a great deal of any specific content has limited application to a wide range of the population the key is that it has become highly cost effective to create and publish content with vertical or specialized focus and it is this factor that has made the Internet such a powerful and compelling medium for consumers. Rather than sit idly in front of a broadcast mass medium television consumers sit at their personal computers and query a search engine to find the topics that interest them no matter how arcane or specialized those topics might be.

More recently we have witnessed the slow but steady growth of commercial video services on the Internet. In particular the range and number of video publishers offering fee based and ad supported streaming video services has begun to grow. The massive investment telecommunications companies made in the last several years in connectivity and broadband capability has begun to pay off. Broadband penetration has reached a critical mass where the economics of broadband delivery and access are now feasible. At the same time the increasing sophistication of digital editing compression and encoding technologies and the limitations of ordinary cable and broadcast distribution has set the stage for an explosive growth in the creation of and demand for the delivery of video and other digital content over the Internet.

A broad range of TV brands and cable networks have begun to expand their use of the Internet with advertising and subscription supported streaming products. Largely these efforts have been experimental and in terms of the overall market of mainstream networks this represents a tiny percentage of the available suppliers. Additionally there already exists a wave of next tier providers and producers who currently do not have carriage on cable or satellite who will look to this new open distribution channel as a means to monetize their media.

As the economics and enabling technologies of video distribution on the Internet progresses the creation of video and other digital content for Internet delivery will experience a similar growth as was seen previously in the creation of specialized text and graphical content. Serving these needs is a primary purpose of the Invention.

In general in one aspect publishers of digital content are enabled each to define for each of one or more digital content items a style in which the digital content item is to be presented to a user and a condition under which the user may have the digital content item presented. The digital content items are stored in a content library the styles and conditions associated with the digital content items are stored in a server. Each of the digital content items is enabled to be presented to users within presentation contexts that are accessible to the users and controlled by presentation context providers. The presentation of the digital content items includes obtaining the digital content items from the server and controlling the presentation to occur under the conditions and in the styles defined by the publishers.

Implementations may include one or more of the following features. The publishers are provided with a selection of predefined templates that can be customized. The publishers may create their own templates that can access the content library. The publishers generate a package that includes one or more of the digital content items the package includes at least one of a rental subscription pay to own and a discount applied to a bundle of content items including the media product. The publisher pays the cost of distribution and delivery. Each of the digital content items is arranged as streaming video or music or as a downloadable file. The styles define a user experience.

In general in another aspect a party that controls a digital presentation context that is accessible to users can permit inclusion in the presentation context of a presentation content code the presentation content code being configured to present digital content items to the users within the presentation context. The presentation content code is configured to control the presentation of each of the digital content items in accordance with the defined style and condition. The party that controls the digital presentation context is paid for permitting the inclusion of the presentation content code in the presentation context.

Implementations may include one or more of the following features. The digital content items are delivered to a user operating the presentation context in response to receiving the presentation content code. To the user the digital content appears to be originating directly from the presentation context.

In general in another aspect a user or an aggregator aggregates sets of digital content items which have been offered as publisher subscriptions by publishers to form custom subscriptions. Revenue is derived from presentation of the custom subscriptions. At least portions of the revenue are distributed to the publishers. The derivation and distribution of revenue is adjusted to reflect volume discounts defined by the publishers with respect to volume of usage by the users for respective digital content items or respective publisher subscriptions.

Implementations may include one or more of the following features. At least one of the custom subscriptions spans at least two different publishers. A custom subscription is priced according to multiple pricing models that are linked to characteristics of different users who have purchased one or more digital content items of a custom subscription. Characteristics include at least one of an interest in a particular topic and a user s impression of the quality of a publisher.

In general in another aspect a first user electronically refers a digital content item to a second user. In connection with the referral a publisher of the digital content item controls a context in which and a financial condition under which the digital content item may be presented to the other user.

Implementations may include one or more of the following features. The second user is prompted to register if the second user is not a registered member. A preview of the digital content item is sent to the second user with instructions for purchasing the digital content item.

In general in another aspect a server maintains information about rights of users to receive presentations of digital content items. Each of the users can receive presentations of the digital content items for which the user has rights from the server at any time at any location and on any one of a variety of presentation devices including personal computers notebook computers portable video players digital versatile disk players and televisions. The users have customizable tools for viewing the presentations. A payment is received in exchange for the rights.

In general in another aspect digital content items of publishers are stored together with information defined by the publisher that enables each of the content items to be presented to users through any one of a variety of presentation channels that each provides a presentation context under the control of a presentation context provider. Implementations may include one or more of the following features. The channels include at least one of web browser networked television email instant messaging rich site summary and short message service. The content items are indexed using the information defined by the publisher to form a catalog index. A search tool provides information in the catalog index to a user according to searching criteria defined by the user. The information defined by the publisher includes at least one of a name date of production description of content and an identification number.

In general in another aspect a central service enables publishers to publish digital content items through the service directly at retail for presentation to users for compensation. The central service also enables the publishers to electronically establish relationships with affiliates to permit the publishers to publish the digital content items through the service and the affiliates indirectly at wholesale for presentation by the affiliates to the users for compensation.

Implementations may include one or more of the following features. The publishers can grant and restrict access to digital content items for affiliates. The affiliates have access to a list of digital content items that are available to them from each of the publishers. The affiliates define packages of the digital content items. The packages include at least one of a rental subscription purchase and a discount applied to a bundle of media content items. The affiliates define packages of the digital content items wherein the affiliate pays the cost of distribution and delivery and the publisher is compensated for the usage and viewing of the digital content items.

In general in another aspect a publisher defines custom digital content packages each including one or more digital content items. The definition of each of the digital content packages includes the context and conditions under which the digital content package may be presented to a given user. The presentation of each of the digital content items to users is controlled based on the characteristics of the user or context in which the presentation is made and on the conditions for the presentation. Compensation passes from the users to the publishers for the presentations. Different packages are defined to enable the publisher to garner revenue users contexts and conditions lying across a full range of a demand curve for the digital content items.

Implementations may include one or more of the following features. A publisher defines titles for the one or more digital content items. The titles include metadata that provides information about at least one of a content quality and condition of the media product. The publisher organizes the titles as a lineup. The publisher inserts advertisements provided by advertising entities into the digital content package and garners revenue from the advertising entities.

In general in another aspect a presentation content provider which electronically provides a presentation context to users can permit the presentation context to include a publicly available presentation content code that enables a presentation to users of digital content items that are controlled by one or more publishers. The presentation is made under financial conditions and in a presentation style that is defined by the publishers. The presentation content provider is compensated for permitting the presentation content code to be included in the presentation context.

Implementations may include one or more of the following features. The presentation context includes advertisements that generate advertisement revenue. The presentation content provider shares a portion of the advertisement revenue. The presentation content provider shares a portion of revenue collected from payments made by users to receive the digital content items.

Other aspects include methods systems apparatus program products means for performing actions and other combinations of the features mentioned above and other features.

Other advantages and features will become apparent from the following description and from the claims.

As shown in broad terms in in a content distribution system content for example a video clip can be presented in some cases interactively to a user in a presentation aperture e.g. a rectangular window within a broader presentation context e.g. a web page . The presentation context may be provided by a presentation context application for example a browser . The presentation aperture may be provided by a presentation content code say a snippet of code that implements a media player that runs in cooperation with the presentation context application . The presentation context is delivered from a presentation server e.g. a web server . The content style and terms of use of the presentation context are determined by a presentation context provider that controls the presentation server e.g. a merchant that hosts a web site .

The content presented to the user in the presentation aperture is provided from a content distributor which maintains a content library of stored items of content packaged for presentation through the presentation content code . The creation of the packaged content items is controlled by one or more publishers that have access to raw content items which they either control themselves or can obtain from other content sources . For example the content distributor could be a party that is independent of any presentation context provider publisher other content source or user . The content distributor could serve as a central market maker or clearinghouse for packaged content items under a profit yielding business model.

The publishers could be for example owners of video material and the raw content items could be raw video files. The other content sources could be advertisers. The publishers could be anyone who has raw content items to distribute including individuals.

In some implementations of the system shown in the publishers not the content distributor or the presentation context provider determine not only which raw content items to include in the packaged content items but also the style and terms under which the packaged content items are provided through the presentation aperture to the user . Style could include anything that defines the user s experience including graphical features sound features inclusion of non video elements such as text or still images and interactive features. Terms could include the price and other conditions under which the presentation is made to the user and the time period during which the presentation would be available for example.

The system shown in could be implemented in the context of a variety of business models in which revenue is derived from various parties. Publishers may pay for the opportunity to have packaged content items made available to users through the presentation aperture . Users may pay for the presentation of packaged content items. The presentation context provider may pay for the ability to offer the packaged content items of one or more publishers . Advertisers may pay for the placement of advertisements as part of the packaged content items .

Portions of the revenue could be paid to various parties. The publishers may be paid for packaged content items that they provide. The presentation context providers may be paid for permitting advertising or content items to be delivered to users . The users may be paid for agreeing to make themselves subject to content items and advertising or in effect for subjecting themselves to a large volume of content items or advertising. The content distributor may be paid for serving as the central market maker or clearinghouse for storing packaged content items for managing the flow of revenue and payments and for other activities.

Financial arrangements that implement the business models may be governed by routine and automated processes for example the registration of new users and new publishers or by negotiation between for example a publisher and a particular presentation context provider . Presentation context providers that agree to participate and permit packaged content items to be presented to users may be known as affiliates. For example a web site portal devoted to skiing could agree to include a presentation aperture on its web site for a publisher of ski videos and the financial arrangement between them may be negotiated. The web site portal then becomes an affiliate of the system.

The content distributor can provide the medium for exchange of the revenue and payments contemplated by each business model through financial management processor .

The system shown in enables any publisher including individuals to easily distribute packaged content items to any user anywhere in the world and to control the style and terms and therefore the business model under which the user is given access. Affiliates and other presentation context providers can provide packaged content items of interest to their users with essentially no effort and the prospect of generating additional revenue. Users are exposed to a broader and deeper range of packaged content items and can take advantage of them at different costs under a variety of business models.

A wide variety of implementations of the system are possible. The content items need not be video but could be any kind of digital item including text images sounds and software. The presentation context need not be a web page but could be any presentation that is suitable for the content being presented and the hardware device on which the presentation is being made for example a notebook computer a workstation a kiosk a telephone or any other portable or handheld device. The content need not be delivered through an IP network but can be conveyed in any manner and by any medium that content can be stored or transmitted.

The remaining sections of the document describe the implementation of these techniques and other features of the system in greater detail.

The part entitled System Overview provides a description of the overall content distribution system shown in and describes how different components of the system interact with each other.

The section of that part entitled Overview of Client Platforms describes the hardware and software functions of the user publisher and affiliate client platforms shown in respectively. The sub section entitled User Platform describes the hardware and software of the user s client computer the sub section entitled Publisher Platform describes the hardware and software of the publisher s client computer and introduces the publisher console and the sub section entitled Affiliate Platform describes the hardware and software of the affiliate s client computer and introduces the affiliate console.

The section entitled Service Platform describes the hardware and software of the service platform shown in . The service platform is maintained by the content distributor and includes various software and hardware components for provisioning and distributing content items. The subsections within the Service Platform section describe each of the main software and hardware components and their functionality. These subsections are entitled Content Library Three tier Platform Video Streaming Platform Media Delivery Platform Media Indexing Module Search Tool Content Delivery Engine Financial Management Processor Messaging Module Personalization Module and Reporting Module.

The section entitled Provisioning and Publishing Content Items describes the processes by which publishers through the publisher console upload and package content items and define a viewer experience for presenting the content items to a user in connection with the flowchart shown in . This section includes a subsection entitled Registration that describes the process for registering a publisher with the service and creating an account a subsection entitled Walk through Presentation that describes a process by which the system provides a walk through shown in the initial dashboard of on how the publisher is to use the online programming and selling environment a subsection entitled Uploading Content that describes the process by which a publisher uploads content to the service platform using a media management screen shown in a subsection entitled Title Generation that describes the process by which a publisher creates edits and manages titles of media content using a title management screen and a title editing screen shown in and for defining and editing titles a subsection entitled Lineup Generation that describes a process by which a publisher defines ordered lists of titles referred to as lineups using a lineup management screen provided by the publisher console a subsection entitled Player Definition that describes a process by which the publisher defines a player through which titles and lineups are presented according to a viewer experience using a player management screen shown in a player editing screen shown in and a template selection screen shown in for selecting a player template from a selection of default player templates examples of which are shown in a style editing screen shown in for customizing the look and feel of the player a content editing screen shown in for selecting the content to be presented in the player and a preview screen shown in for previewing the player and a subsection entitled Publishing Player that describes a process by which the publisher or any user can incorporate the player into their web page by inserting a presentation content code provided by the service platform. shows an example of a presentation content code.

The section entitled Advertising Promotion and Marketing describes the tools provided to publishers that enable them to market their product offerings within the service platform network including the publisher s websites or affiliate websites and externally through marketing partners customer messaging and search engines. This section includes a subsection entitled User Notification that describes built in mechanisms provided to publishers to notify users when new content items and services become available a subsection entitled Keyword Bidding that describes tools provided to the publisher for managing and bidding on keywords and paid listings in search engines a subsection entitled Advertisement Supported Content that describes a feature of the service that enables advertising to be integrated with packaged content items a subsection entitled Advertisement Insertion Tools that describe tools that enable the publisher to define the placement and accepted formats of advertising in a player and a subsection entitled Advertising Templates that describes a selection of advertising templates examples of which are shown in in which a publisher or advertiser may place video banner logo or any other graphic or textual advertisement or promotional content and from the advertising templates define the players shown in and a subsection entitled Ad Renditions that describes different renditions of ads that can be served to a user based on the method that the user views the ad e.g. video streaming .

The section entitled User Experience describes various features of a user experience and the process by which a user interacts with the service. This section includes a subsection entitled Desktop Client that describes the features of a desktop client application that provides an enhanced entertainment experience a subsection entitled Service Platform Features that describes features made available to a user through the service platform a subsection entitled Account Management that describes account management service provided to the user for registering with the system and creating and managing an account a subsection entitled Television that describes the user functions that are available through a television interface a subsection entitled Download of Content that describes various mechanism by which the service delivers downloaded files to a user and a subsection entitled Communities of Interest that describes the community oriented tools provided by the service to help users to share information regarding a content item with others.

A second part entitled Revenue Models provides a description of various revenue models that are supported by the content distribution system. The chapter includes a section entitled User Pays that describes a revenue model based on money collected from users. The different mechanisms by which revenue is collected from users are described in the subsections entitled Subscriptions Rentals Purchases and Bundles. The subsection entitled Pricing and Payment describes different methods by which a publisher prices content items and mechanisms by which users pay for those content items. For example as described in the sub subsection entitled Demand Curve Model a publisher can set the price of a package according a demand curve model and multiple pricing models that are linked to characteristics of different users e.g. the interest of the user in particular topics and the user s impression of the quality of the publisher etc. .

The section entitled Publisher Pays describes a revenue model based solely on money paid by the publisher for use of the service. The section includes a subsection entitled Listing Fees that describes the types of listing fees paid by publishers to use the service a subsection entitled Activation describes the process by which a publisher activates publisher pays economics a subsection entitled User Access describes various options available to a publisher for restricting access a users access to content items a subsection entitled Usage Reports that describes the types of reports provided to the publisher that detail usage and invoice data associated with the publisher s content items.

The section entitled Affiliate Pays describes a revenue model based solely on money paid by the affiliate as fee to use content provided by publishers.

The third part entitled Business Models describes various business models supported by the content distribution system and the flow of money in accordance with the applicable business model. The business models are described in the sections entitled Open Marketplace and Federated Marketplace. Various features of the federated marketplace business model are described in the subsections Federated Delivery Federated Identity Affiliate Relationships and Revenue Sharing.

The fourth part entitled Components of the Content Distribution System describes various technical implementations of the content distribution system.

The content distribution system shown in supports a variety of business models that enable publishers to publish package brand and sell video and other content items also called assets through their own presentation contexts e.g. websites and optionally through a marketplace of suppliers referred to as affiliates . The term service includes all of the features systems and methods described here for enabling publication and delivery of content by any party.

The content distribution system includes a service platform maintained by the content distributor client computers and a network e.g. the Internet that delivers data between the client computers and controlled by publishers affiliates and users and a content delivery network CDN that delivers data on behalf of the service platform to the client computer .

The publisher console is a user interface through which a publisher at a client computer interacts with the service platform . Using the publisher console a publisher registers with the service platform which in turn assigns a unique publisher identification number to the publisher and uploads assets to the service platform . The service platform associates the assets with the publisher s identification number and stores the assets in the content library . The assets may include video image audio files and any other kind of media content.

In connection with uploading the publisher can define and create packaged content items from the assets uploaded into the service platform and publisher supplied metadata. The publisher can create a range of commerce enabled packaging options on their packaged content items including subscription packages that provide monthly and annual billing with constraints on available programming for the user pay per view and purchase to own options with micro payment billing on individual titles and advertising supported media including tools to easily insert and manage a set of rich media advertising formats including interactive and video advertisements. The publisher specifies the prices for accessing renting or purchasing or subscribing to packaged content items and discounts that may apply to volume usage or other promotional mechanics. Publishers are also able to participate in a dynamic bundling system in which they can offer their content items as part of consumer self packaged bundles of programming. The publisher may choose to be pay listing fees for all costs associated with the distribution of packaged content items . Publishers may grant access to their packaged content items to affiliates . The affiliate may in turn act as a distribution channel for consumer transactions or advertising on the behalf of publishers . An affiliate may request the right to syndicate and pay publishers for the privilege of delivering the publishers packaged content items . The service collects revenue from publishers in the form of listing fees from consumers in the form of payment for accessing content items from affiliates in the form of syndication fees and from advertisers in the form of payments for performance based advertising inventory. Gross revenues from consumers syndication fees and advertisers are shared among affiliates publishers and the service.

In the publisher console the publisher defines a framework for displaying the uploaded assets and packaged content items to a user . This framework is referred to as a viewer experience and is an example of the presentation style referred to with respect to . A viewer experience may include the order in which e.g. as a video lineup or an audio play list packaged content items are presented and the display of the economic terms for accessing renting or purchasing packaged content items . A viewer experience may also associate various images with video clips such that when a user runs a video clip the client device displays a corresponding image. The viewer experience can be implemented as a Flash Macromedia program or any other program for authoring and delivering multimedia.

The service platform assigns an identification number to the player that is to a package of content and related viewer experience information and returns the number to the publisher console . The publisher console then presents a presentation content code to the publisher that includes any identification numbers required to present the viewer experience to a user . When the presentation content code is embedded in the publisher s web page or any other party s web page such as an affiliate or a user the media content identified by the presentation content code can be viewed within the web page in the manner specified by the publisher . The publisher may provide the presentation content code to affiliates or other parties for embedding in their web pages either under standardized commercial deals mediated automatically by the system or according to negotiated arrangements. The presentation content code enables an affiliate web page to retrieve the assets from the service platform and deliver it to a user according to the viewer experience defined for the assets and packaged content items .

Using the publisher console the publisher also manages relationships with an affiliate . In some embodiments the publisher console provides the publisher with a list of affiliates who have permission to access various assets. The publisher may edit the list to include additional affiliates or to change the permissions granted to existing affiliates.

Similar to the publisher console the affiliate console is a user interface through which an affiliate at a client computer interacts with the service platform . Using the affiliate console the affiliate can view the packaged content items and viewer experiences to which the affiliate has been granted access permissions and the terms of agreement. In some embodiments the affiliate console enables the affiliate to request access to packaged content items and viewer experiences belonging to a publisher and to propose terms for a deal. The terms of the deal between the publisher and the affiliate may be determined by interaction through the affiliate console and the publishing console .

A user at a client computer accesses publishers and affiliates web pages over the communications network using a web browser program e.g. Internet Explorer or Firefox . For example the user could provide the web browser with a Universal Resource Locators URL of a desired web page. When the user opens a web page in which the presentation content code has been embedded the code sends the identification numbers to the service platform . From the identification numbers the service platform determines the assets and corresponding viewer experience that are to be supplied to the web page.

The client computer includes a multimedia player e.g. a Flash Macromedia player for viewing the assets according to the defined viewer experience. After the multimedia player launches it invokes the service platform to transmit the assets and viewer experience from the service platform and or the CDN . The service platform returns a player component that contains information about the assets packaged content items and viewer experience. The multimedia player uses the player component to fetch the catalog meta data and assets from the service platform and the CDN and then presents the assets within the web page in accordance with the viewer experience. The service platform may also allow a publisher to leverage geographic targeting capabilities to fine tune the availability of content to different target audiences.

The CDN provides optimal performance on downloads and video streaming. In some embodiments the CDN is provided by vendors such as Akamai who handle scaling global media delivery and include additional tools such as Akamai s EdgePlatform.

In some embodiments the client computer is a Web client that is part of a Web based environment and the multimedia player is a Flash Player runtime that is compatible with different operating systems and web browsers. In some embodiments the client computer is a desktop container application that utilizes presentation technology available from Maven Networks Inc. And the multimedia player is a combination of a Flash player and a Windows Media player. The multimedia player enables a user to interact with the assets provided by the service platform . The multimedia player presents the assets from web pages belonging to a publisher or an affiliate of the publisher . In some embodiments the multimedia player is launched directly from a publisher s or affiliate s web page.

In some embodiments the multimedia player is based on Macromedia Flash Player 7 which is currently distributed on the Web and supports Flash 7 video. In other embodiments the multimedia player is a Macromedia Flash Player 8 that supports Flash 8 video.

A consumer services module provides a user with a variety of web based and desktop tools to enable consumers to find aggregate download stream and share content from multiple publishers. The consumer services module also provides a variety of community tools for rating and reviewing content sampling selected content where enabled by the publisher and remixing content to share with friends where enabled by the publisher .

The publisher console is a browser based rich internet application that provides the user interface to work with all of the services provided by the service platform . A publisher accesses the publisher console by providing a secure password. Using the publisher console the publisher uploads assets to the service platform and manages their distribution and delivery. In some embodiments the assets are delivered by a third party post production firms which provide turnkey encoding and uploading directly into the service platform .

The publisher console includes an upload client that enhances the speed and reliability of the uploading of assets. In some embodiments the upload client enables simultaneous uploading of multiple files. In some embodiments files are uploaded in a batch using file transfer protocol FTP along with an extended markup language XML manifest which describes the files. The files are then automatically stored into the publisher s account.

The assets are identified by their name or other unique identifier. Within the publisher console the publisher assigns uploaded assets to titles. A title includes metadata that provides information about the content quality condition and other characteristics of the assets. A title may include for example a name that identifies the content of the asset s a name of the producer publisher that owns the title the date on which the title was created and the length of the asset.

Within the publisher console the publisher defines the viewer experience for presenting the titles to a user . The presentation of the titles according to the viewer experience is done by a player which is initiated by the presentation content code of . Players enable a user to interact with video in the service. Players live inside a variety of destinations including web pages belonging to the party providing the service platform affiliates web pages and publisher s web pages. On a publisher s web page the publisher controls all the programming in each of their players using a number of mechanisms. The publisher console provides the publisher with configurable templates that support a wide variety of player sizes and layouts. The publisher may place players anywhere they want on their web pages and they have strong control over the look and feel as well as the content in each of the players.

In some embodiments the publisher affiliate or user can develop their own custom player that integrates with the service platform . These custom players rely upon a set of application programming interfaces APIs that expose functionality of the service platform. In some embodiments these APIs may be exposed as SOAP based web services or Flash Remoting APIs.

After the publisher finishes defining a player the publisher incorporates the player into their web site using a presentation content code provided by the publisher console . The publisher console provides the publisher with a presentation content code that contains a player ID for the player. When the presentation content code is placed in a publisher s or affiliate s web page the browser displaying the web page can retrieve the player from the service platform and present the player to a user . The player that is presented to a user and the media presented by the player is served by the service platform or the CDN . Changing the player ID provided in the presentation content code changes the player that is loaded from the service platform .

The publisher console provides the publisher with programming tools that control programming of assets and titles in a player. Examples of programming include a lineups b fixed play and c page based programming. Within the publisher console publishers can define a lineup. A lineup is a collection of titles that can be organized by a number of mechanisms including but not limited to the following forms titles can be explicitly ordered titles can by dynamically grouped based on a range of query parameters titles can be organized in a hierarchy categories titles can be sorted by common metadata. Fixed play programming combines content and layout into a single player experience. Fixed play programming is advantageous in situations where the lineup of titles is fixed or the number of titles is very small. The content is specified when the player is created in the publisher console by associating a specific video title with the player. For page based programming when a player is called from a web page the call to the player can specify the title s or lineup s that the player will display. Through this mechanism a publisher can use the content management system that controls the text and graphic content in their websites to control the content that is delivered through the player in their website. Assets can be referenced by their unique identification numbers assigned by the service platform or by a different identification number that is specified by the publisher when the title is created.

The publisher is provided with a software development kit SDK to facilitate Web Services i.e. SOAP or Flash Remoting integration and custom Flash development. The SDK enables the publisher to created integrated brand experiences through their existing websites. The SDK includes most if not all the main functions and services provided by the service platform e.g. search browse preview account management purchase payment streamed content viewing and download delivery as well as rating review and messaging functions .

The affiliate console allows a registered affiliate to select available titles and viewer experiences of publishers for inclusion on a web page. From the affiliate console the registered affiliate can retrieve the presentation content code required to reference a viewer experience previously defined and authorized by publishers. The registered affiliate may also have the option of directly selecting video titles from multiple publishers creating their own line ups and presenting these items in a viewer experience that the registered affiliate creates.

In some embodiments the publishers will have complete control over the titles and viewer experiences that registered affiliates may access. A publisher may authorize all affiliates access to all titles managed by the publisher. Alternatively a publisher may selectively grant access to specific affiliates for specific titles line ups or viewer experiences.

When the presentation content code is placed in the affiliate s web page the web page can retrieve the player from the service platform and present the player to a user . In addition to any identification numbers required to display the correct viewer experience the presentation content code will include an identification number of the registered affiliate . This registered affiliate identification code can be used by the service platform to track usage and transactions facilitated through the affiliated viewer experience. The player presented to a user is delivered by the service platform however from the consumer s perspective the content appears to be originating directly from the affiliate s web page.

The service platform shown in may be any type of computing device or multiple computing devices that include a processor and memory that stores software . The processor executes software which includes a Web client application a video streaming platform a presentation services module a media deliver platform a media indexing module a search engine a content delivery engine a financial management processor a messaging module a recommendation services module a reporting module and operating software . The operating software includes but is not limited to an operating system and a communication module for effecting communication over the Internet and the CDN .

Service platform includes a content library for storing assets uploaded by publishers and data associated with the software . Although only one content library is shown in the depicted content library represents any physical or virtual centralized or distributed database suitable for the receipt and storage of files. Each file is an entity of data i.e. a string of bytes that is capable of being manipulated as an entity. The files can represent any kind of information such as video audio text images executables or simply binary data.

The service platform has a three tier architecture which scales horizontally as the load of users on the system increases. The three tiers are web servers application servers and a database cluster. The service platform incorporates redundancy and failover so that there are no single points of failure in the system. In some embodiments the infrastructure of the service platform is designed to provide approximately 99.99 uptime less than approximately 120 minutes of unscheduled downtime per year . In some embodiments the content library in which assets are stored is a redundant and mirrored file storage database that is hosted at a facility that is multi homed.

The video streaming platform provides streaming video to a user at client . One embodiment for the video streaming platform is based on Macromedia Flash Communication Server or Microsoft Windows Media Services server both of which can be deployed in an edge based CDN environment.

The presentation services module is built upon a Macromedia Flash MX client platform HTML web pages and JavaScript code. The presentation services module controls the viewer experience as defined by the publisher or affiliate . An affiliate may also be a publisher or an individual user. The consumer service can rely upon the Flash Player runtime to optimize both the performance and visual richness for users . The publisher affiliate or other administrative consoles can be built upon the Macromedia Flex application framework to deliver services to publishers and affiliates. Tangential and supporting services will be built as J2EE Web Applications and integrated with the larger set of J2EE business objects.

The media delivery platform intelligently distributes content based on schedule and time requirements on demand download and streaming requests and cost constraints imposed by the packaging options. For example a video program may be streamed on demand via Flash for one user on a pay per view or subscription basis for another the video program may be the same but with advertising and for another the video program may be a scheduled download delivery to a desktop using BitTorrent P2P distribution. In some embodiments the media delivery platform uses Macromedia Flash Communications Server and Flash Video to deliver on demand streaming video to a user and Microsoft Windows Media Video formats and codec s to deliver TV and DVD quality videos to a user for access on their personal computer PC or networked television.

The media delivery platform provides different methods for delivering content services to users including multiple delivery methods for any single or set of packaged content items including on demand streaming in a web browser on demand TV quality delivery background or trickle down downloads and peer to peer distribution of media. The media delivery platform optimizes the delivery method based on the consumer request and cost parameters defined by the service operator . Multiple clients and platforms are supported including web based streaming with high quality experiences delivered in Macromedia Flash PC based TV quality experiences offered in full screen quality using technology from Maven Networks Inc and TV based experiences through integration with various consumer electronics devices such as Microsoft Media Center XBox or TiVo environments.

The media delivery platform also provides a series of facilities for secure and reliable cross device distribution of content. The media delivery platform can accommodate the distribution and use of content across a network of websites and across a range of primary end user devices including high quality streaming through any Flash enabled web browser PC based viewing in TV quality format via download on portable devices and DVD players and directly on network connected TV monitors. The media delivery platform may integrate and distribute into additional and external media delivery platforms such as those offered by mobile carriers or Video On Demand VOD platforms managed by cable and satellite corporations such as Comcast and DirectTV.

The media delivery platform includes a a generic policy enforcement layer that can accommodate arbitrary use and delivery of content b a transparent user experience with respect to rights license acquisition and enforcement c the ability to distribute across a federation of affiliate websites in a manner that simplifies the technical integration required by affiliates d the ability to dynamically determine the most time sensitive and cost effective means to deliver the content and e flexible deployment across streaming progressive download background download peer to peer distribution home network file sharing and external media delivery platforms.

The media delivery platform includes a policy management layer that provides fine grained media access control for web based experience and rights license distribution and authorization for download and DRM protected content. When publishers define packages within the service a corresponding set of logical policies for that media are instantiated into the policy management layer. When a user purchases or has gained rights to a packaged content item a corresponding policy identifier is attached to the user account. At delivery time the user identity flows through the policy management service to determine whether and what rights the user has to that packaged content item . In the event of a web based experience the application simply streams the content back to the user . In the event of a download based experience the application first enables content delivery of the file and later when a playback event for the download media occurs the user s personal computer uses a pre delivered digital rights management DRM license to grant usage of the media. All media usage events are audited and logged by the access control service.

The media delivery platform provides robust and high quality media experiences for users accessing the media. In some embodiments streamed video creates an experience that is instant on with as little buffering as possible that does not require the user to choose a video player or select a bandwidth option that works automatically on approximately 90 plus of installed Internet connected computers running any version of Windows Macintosh Linux or any web browser that offers branded integration into the containing application or website that enables inline and in context video and interactive advertising and that can easily enable synchronization to external content.

The media delivery platform provides multiple approaches to downloading the assets associated with packaged content items . In some embodiments the media delivery platform may utilize two mechanisms for download delivery foreground download and background download. Foreground downloads are delivered using the service operator s CDN partner and offers a near on demand experience for TV quality media. Download events are trigged by consumer requests for a particular media product. These requests can be issued synchronously and asynchronously. Examples of request events that trigger downloads include selecting a packaged content item to have downloaded browsing through a library via a TV that requests immediate playback a consumer indicating interest in a packaged content item upon receiving notification via a Instant Messaging IM or mobile Short Message Service SMS message and packaged content items becoming available as part of a series or subscription.

The media indexing module builds text based meta data from the audio track or other extracted meta data of video files. This meta data may be used to generate XML or HTML versions of video content that can be indexed by search engine crawlers.

The media indexing module indexes discrete pieces of content according to publisher provided meta data. Layered on top of this base level of searchable data a variety of end user feedback is added. For example content reviews favored play lists recommendations and forum discussions all become useful end user generated meta data for indexing content. The media indexing module generates indices on a per publisher and service wide basis. Associated user generated meta data are indexed and linked to specific content items. The media indexing module offers publishers an optional service to audio index their video content extract topics and keywords and make this extracted content Internet search engine accessible.

The search tool enables a user to search the content library of assets. In some embodiments the search tool is a database driven search combined with full text index searches using a third party enterprise search engine such as that provided by Lucene. The search tool maintains indexes of assets on a channel seller and global basis. In other embodiments the search engine is an external service to the service platform such as those offered by companies like Google or Yahoo . When users access these external search engines they provide a search query which returns a result set. The result set offered by the external search engine can include entries that reference titles managed by the service platform.

The search tool uses Rich Internet Application RIA techniques to provide users with a visually compelling and highly productive interface for conducting searches and navigating results. The search tool also provides a flexible and productive user interface for browsing its content taxonomy by topic. This interface constantly evolves as new publishers participate in the service and are maintained by the service content staff but with ongoing input and feedback from publishers affiliates and users .

The search tool facilitates Internet enabled searches where users are able to find any service contained content through Google or other search engines as well as through any web links directly to media within HTML pages and RSS feeds service only searches where users are able to use keyword and category searches within the service itself and searches across a topic hierarchy.

The content delivery engine is used for intelligent and incremental downloads and uploads. The content delivery engine defines optimization algorithms that leverage reliable content delivery networks and BitTorrent delivery. In some embodiments the content delivery engine is implemented in conjunction with technology provided by Maven Networks Inc. This technology offers reliable and secure incremental uploads of content and supports background uploads of multi gigabyte files. Some advanced publishers may provide video to the service through a third party but private label service bureau via satellite feeds physical media or other forms and in full quality MPEG 2 format. Additionally the content delivery engine offers private label encoding and post production services through an integrated third party provisioning system.

The content delivery engine uses the Windows Media DRM platform to protect and secure provisioned content. WMV files can be protected by the rights holder before provisioning into the service or the service can secure the files before being made available through the marketplace. In either scenario through the service s policy framework the service verifies and authorizes consumer access and grant licenses.

The financial management processor supports billing services to handle consumer transactions and back office subscription management and billing functions. In some embodiments the financial management processor is integrated with mainstream transaction providers such as VeriSign and PayPal .

The financial management processor also provides deployment infrastructure for handling all consumer facing transactions including selection order processing and clearing and handling credit card and other payment instruments. The service commerce features provides fine grained access management rights based on DRM policies enabled by consumer payment.

The financial management processor manages all consumer transactions including product and product related options selection payment method authentication order processing and settlement. This is handled though integration with a payment service vendor such as VeriSign. All consumer payments are made directly to the service i.e. a credit card purchase would show the service as the merchant of record. Micro payments and pre paid accounts are supported to allow customers to purchase Video Minutes . The financial management processor provides real time account balance management and supports account replenishment using authorized debit from consumer credit cards or bank accounts when the minutes balance is depleted. The financial management processor also provides post purchase care to handle refunds and chargebacks of settled transactions. Transactions from affiliate sites are captured in a way that identifies the affiliate as the source of the transaction. This information is used for affiliate payments and reporting. The financial management processor also supports price discounts based on promotions coupon codes and gift certificates.

The messaging module allow users to easily share content with friends colleagues and family using third party messaging techniques. In some embodiments a mobile messaging platform such as that provided by m Qube or an instant messaging platform such as that provided by IMlogic is integrated with the messaging module .

The messaging module uses cross channel messaging i.e. email instant messaging IM short message service SMS desktop client notification for a variety of brand marketing customer acquisition and retention strategies. Some messages are used to keep users engaged with their entertainment choices. Certain messages are used as a means for extended control and media scheduling. Ideally all communication includes some manner of personalized content targeted toward the specific user . If the member has previously installed the desktop client any links embedded in the message is used as an initiation to launch the service client.

The messaging module regularly schedules mailings to users to highlight new services and content available through the marketplace. These messages can include videos available from their subscriptions videos they have not watched advanced previews recommended content etc. For example on a regular basis a user could receive an email at work that highlights video programs that are newly available from their subscription packages or other recommended programs. From these messages the user could indicate programs of interest.

Similarly a user might send an Email SMS or IM message about a video that might be of interest to one or more contacts. If the user is authenticated the service provides the option to send a message to a set of known contacts or defined social groups. A contact who receives the notice could then reply that they would like to view this content. If the contact is not registered with the service the message might contain additional information about the service so the potential new customer is comfortable with establishing a new relationship. After the contact registers the service provides the content to the contact. In some embodiments registration is not required to view the content. For example in some embodiments registration need not be required for previews nor for ad supported content.

The service can use this type of proactive service to initiate downloads onto a consumer s client computer using commodity bandwidth. The service saves money by leveraging lower bandwidth costs and the consumer benefits because they can immediately watch DVD quality video without having to search and browse the video library after coming home from work or outside activity.

The personalization module gathers user recommendations based on explicit peer supplied reviews and ratings and based on affinity and click stream based approaches. The personalization module is optimized to increase consumers video spending by highlighting relevant content to individuals households and other affinity groups. The personalization module builds personalization profiles through implicit and explicit profiling of users . Implicit profiles are built by observing the actions of users including analyzing their purchase history and active subscriptions. Users are able to refine their recommendations through ratings highlighting their favorite channels and other integrated forms of active participation. Based on this information the personalization module generates recommendations for video programs and subscription packages. Some recommendation processes are straight forward for example promoting newly published content from producers they have previously enjoyed. Other algorithms might require licensing technology from vendors such as ChoiceStream. In some embodiments the recommendation services module is a third party personalization engine such as ChoiceStream .

Accessing one s video library requires authentication and as such the personalization module can leverage personalization services to perform targeted advertising. The personalization module determines the most relevant advertisements to deliver to a user based on the context of their profile and the video program they are watching.

The personalization module provides automated and manual recommendations based on recent most popular and other ranked lists provided by the service editorial staff. The personalization module employs contextual personalization technologies to provide automated recommendations on content. Unlike collaborative filtering techniques which limit recommendations to social traits the personalization module targets content to users based on their individual tastes and interests.

The reporting module provides a variety of standard reports that are accessible to the publisher through the publishing console . In some embodiments the service platform provides the publisher access to advanced reporting tools upon receiving payment of an additional fee. The reporting module provides reports for each title and on an aggregate basis. Examples of reports include 1 title views 2 title preview play starts 3 title full play stream starts 4 title full play number of minutes streamed 5 title full play download starts 6 title full play download completions 7 player load by player 8 play all clicks by player 9 average total videos played in session 10 average minutes played per video title and 11 total videos completed per session.

The reporting module provides publishers and affiliates with reports that describe the mix of users accessing their assets including demographic and contact data the percentage of ad versus ad free subscriptions traffic statistics and earnings reports that are updated on a daily basis.

The reporting module also provides standardized reporting on media usage including streaming and downloads amount of time spent geographic and subscriber data and revenue activity in the service. In some embodiments the reporting module leverages third party software for performing data warehousing and analytics with a custom user experience on top of these packages.

At provisioning and publishing time the service platform places a copy of the assets into the CDN that then delivers the files to a global audience. At playback time the multimedia player of client computer requests a connection to the CDN is which then facilitates playback of a particular video product.

The service platform provides a publisher with tools to upload media easily and robustly through an integrated desktop provisioning tool as well as through back end FTP and service bureau functions for getting video into the hosted environment transcode video into relevant formats if they are not already available or if needed in other formats for specialized or syndicated distribution classify and index video using both manual meta data input mechanisms as well as automated video indexing techniques that extracts key topics and content from video for use in private search as well as indexing by Internet search engines and select a standard set of viewing experiences for uploaded media using a set of Flash based user experiences. The publisher accesses these tools through the publisher console .

The publisher console provides the publisher with a registration screen for registering an account with the service in a self service manner. To create the account the publisher enters basic user and service meta data into the publisher console . During the registration process the publisher establishes payment and invoicing terms with the service to be scheduled with regular payment and billing cycles. The financial management processor of service platform supports handles scheduling of payments and invoicing functions. In some embodiments the financial management processor is integrated with mainstream transaction providers such as VeriSign PayPal . For example the financial management processor may use a mainstream transaction provider for smaller scale publishers. The financial management processor may also provision an account in advance.

In some embodiments the account assigned to the publisher includes multiple user accounts with roles based permissions. For example each user account can have one of three levels of permission. These include an administrator level which permits a user to do any action in the account including creating or deleting users a programmer level which permits a user to do any action in the account except create and delete users and a contributor level which grants a user the ability to upload assets into an account. The contributor level is generally assigned to post production partners or other people in the publisher organization who handle post production needs and content provisioning.

During the registration process the publisher console prompts the publisher to define a set of information about their content and services. The information includes but is not limited to the type of content they offer basic brand assets to be used in listing their products and additional user accounts. In some embodiments publishers are required to support a fixed set of video formats and quality controls. For example for online streaming videos may be encoded with Flash Video. For publishers that are providing TV or DVD quality products the publishers may be required to provide the produces as secure Windows Media Video files.

The publisher console also enables the publisher to configure their merchant payment and invoicing terms e.g. their PayPal or credit card account information where cleared transactions are to be delivered.

The publisher logs into the account by entering authentication information e.g. a username and password into the publisher console . After the service platform verifies the publisher s authentication information the service platform via the publisher console presents the publisher with a presentation that provides a detailed walk through of how to use the online programming and selling environment. The walk through is a high level overview to acquaint the publisher with the functions of the service. After the providing the presentation the publisher console presents an initial dashboard that provides the publisher with instructions for publishing media content.

An example of the initial dashboard is shown in . The initial dashboard includes a welcome message a description of three basic steps for creating a player a section that provides news and updates relating to the service and a feedback panel in which the publisher can send comments and questions to the party managing the service platform .

When the publisher clicks on the Upload Images Videos icon presented in the initial dashboard the publisher console presents the publisher with a media content management screen through which the publisher uploads assets to the service platform . The service platform associates the assets with the publisher s ID and stores the assets in the content library .

Examples of the media content management screens are shown in . The media content management screen includes a scrollable panel that displays a list of assets uploaded by the publisher . The list is displayed as a data grid that includes a row entry for each asset. A row entry is partitioned into columns each of which include information about the asset such as the name of the asset the file type and the date that the asset was uploaded. The publisher may sort the data grid by column and filter the data grid such that only the entries of interest to the publisher are displayed. The media content management screen also includes a file detail panel that displays information about each file in the list when selected. When a file i.e. an asset is selected in the list the file detail panel displays information related to the file. This information may include for example the name of the file the upload date of the file the upload status of the file e.g. complete or in progress the file type and a thumbnail image . In some embodiments the file detail panel includes a small video window in which the full length video or preview clip can be played .

In some embodiments assets including videos and graphics are uploaded through the publisher console using a service upload client that enhances the speed and reliability of the uploading. The service upload client is a program that can be installed on the client computer . The service upload client facilitates the simultaneous uploading of multiple files. The files may also be batch uploaded using FTP and an XML manifest that describes the files. The files may then be automatically ingested into the publisher s account. In some embodiments before the publisher console delivers an asset to the content library the asset is encoded into a desired format. Examples of such formats include Flash Video at 500 kb s for streaming video and Windows Media Video at 1.5 MB s for downloads.

Additionally some sellers both basic and advanced are not able to provision and upload media themselves. The service offers these firms third party managed but private labeled service bureau functions that can receive physical media VHS DVDS and create appropriate encodings and source media and upload them over high speed lines to the service or a third party satellite media post production facility such as Comcast Media Center or Ascent Media who receive satellite feeds and grab MPEG 2 as well as create other encodings.

After the publisher uploads assets to the service platform the publisher console provides the publisher with a title management screen for defining and editing titles. A title is an example of a packaged content item as shown in and includes metadata that provides information about the content quality condition and other characteristics of the uploaded assets.

An example of a title management screen is shown in . The title management screen displays a list of titles created by the publisher . The list is displayed as a data grid that includes a row entry for each title. A row entry is partitioned into columns each of which includes information about the title such as the name of the title the title status e.g. active or inactive and the creation date of the title. The publisher may sort the data grid by column and filter the data grid such that only those titles fitting publisher selected criteria are displayed. The title management screen also includes a title detail panel that displays information about each title in the list when selected. For example when the title named 1918 The film is selected from the list the title detail panel displays the name of the title the genre a short description the title s reference ID and a thumbnail graphic displaying information associated with the title. In this example the thumbnail graphic displays a picture of the actors starring in the film.

The publisher may edit the title by manipulating the title in the list e.g. double clicking on the title and create new titles by selecting the Create a New Title button displayed in the upper right hand corner of the title management screen. When a publisher indicates the desire to edit a title or create a new title the publisher console provides the publisher with a title editing screen. An example of a title editing screen is shown in .

As seen in the title editing screen shown in the meta data associated with the title 1918 The film includes a name that identifies the title s content short and long descriptions of the content whether the title is displayed in color or black and white the language a rating a release date a linked web site awards received and a reference ID. In some embodiments the meta data also includes a name of the producer or publisher that owns the title the date on which the title was created the length of the title the genre of the content key words credits e.g. director xxx screenwriter yyyy a production year and a product reference id for linking the title to a product title id in an existing catalog or content management system. A title may have multiple graphics associated with it for use in different promotional contexts. For example a graphic could be a thumbnail e.g. a 160 120 24 bit jpeg image a small image e.g. a 480 360 24 bit jpeg image a branding graphic or a background image. The meta data associated with a title may be provided in a service defined XML format such as a format based on the XMLTV or a derivative format.

In some embodiments a title has a name and a single asset that is associated with it. In other embodiments the same title may have multiple assigned assets e.g. video files that are each played back in different contexts e.g. preview vs. full and delivered through different delivery mechanisms e.g. streamed online download to PC etc. . For example a single title could be a combination of multiple video files that include a full length streamed version a full length download version a streaming video preview and a downloadable preview.

Titles that are being distributed can be viewed streamed or optionally they can be made available for download. The value of downloading is the quality of the play back experiences near DVD at full screen . The title may be downloaded and viewed by a user connected to the Internet . The publisher may specify the conditions under which a user can download a video. In some situations a publisher may not permit a title to be downloaded unless the user pays a fee.

After titles for the uploaded assets have been defined the publisher console provides the publisher with a lineup management screen for its own staff to define ordered lists of titles referred to as lineups Within the publisher console the publisher can define lineups of titles. In some cases lineups are created by the publisher as a way to organize and recommend specific videos that the publisher is offering. The same title may belong to more than one lineup. Lineups are published and accessed through a viewer experience permalink URL or through an RSS feed.

When creating a lineup the publisher specifies a name for the lineup and assigns it at least one title. The publisher may provide a description and may select a thumbnail image for the lineup. While creating or editing a lineup the publisher console presents the publisher with a scrollable ordered list of uploaded titles. The title list includes a sub panel that displays information associated with a title in the list. A button is provided to add a video to the list. This button brings up a video title picker. If possible and if consistent with other dialog boxes the picker allows the publisher to select multiple videos to include in a lineup. In some embodiments newly added videos are placed at the end of the list and titles can be dragged and dropped from one location in the list to another.

A lineup management screen not shown is also displayed in the publisher console . The publisher accesses and manages lineups using the tools provided in the lineup management functions. The initial screen for this tab contains two main sections. The right side lists all lineups in a data grid. The left side contains a lineup detail panel that displays information about a selected lineup. The data grid includes a row entry for each lineup. A row entry is partitioned into columns each of which include information about the lineup. Examples of such information include a lineup name the number of videos included in the lineup an active inactive flag indicating whether the lineup is available for distribution and the date on which the lineup was either created or last modified. The publisher may sort the data grid by column and filter the data grid such that only the entries of interest to the publisher are displayed. The publisher may edit a lineup by double clicking on any portion of its row entry. When selected the lineup detail panel displays the following information the name of the lineup a description of the content in the lineup a thumbnail image and the lineup s reference ID. The detail panel then displays a scrollable ordered list of titles contained in the lineup. Next to this list is a sub panel that displays information about each title in the lineup when selected. When a title is selected in the sub panel a video detail sub panel displays the following information the name of the title and a short description of the title s content. In some embodiments the video detail sub panel includes a small video window in which the full length video or preview clip can be played.

The lineup detail panel includes a button to edit and delete the currently selected lineup. If the publisher wishes to delete a lineup that is not being used within any player the publisher console prompts the publisher to confirm or cancel the delete operation. After receiving confirmation to delete the lineup the publisher console sends a command to the service platform that causes the lineup to be deleted from the publisher s account.

If a lineup selected for deletion is being used within any player the publisher console displays a warning dialog that informs the publisher that the lineup is in use. The warning dialog includes a scrollable list of all the players that are using the selected lineup. The publisher is given the option to delete the lineup which causes all references to the lineup to be removed from all of the players displayed in the list or to cancel the delete operation in which case the lineup will remain. The publisher can activate and deactivate lineups. Deactivated lineups are not publicly accessible but can still be edited within the publisher console .

In some embodiments publishers define lineups based on a set of rules applied to dynamic data. These types of lineups are referred to as dynamic lineups. For example a dynamic lineup could be composed of video titles that have a common keyword include popularity ranking or be driven by other recommendations. Dynamic lineups may also have a variety of sorting mechanisms for organizing titles e.g. alphabetical newest to oldest oldest to newest . Publishers have the option to cap the maximum number of titles contained in a dynamic lineup.

In some embodiments publishers have the ability to pre populate non dynamic lineups from a search query. For example a publisher could form a rule that queries for all video titles with the keyword Travel and with a popularity rating of 5 Stars . This result set may return a total of 17 titles from which the publisher might hand select or reorder a subset of 10 from the 17 total available titles.

In addition to augmenting the catalog with lineups the publisher console provides the publisher with tools to organize titles within a series. A series is a special type of lineup whose titles can belong only to that series. The titles in a regular lineup can also belong to other lineups. Series are created and managed along with other lineups. The same functions that are used for managing lineups are used for managing series. For example a publisher can add or remove a title from a series in the same manner describe for a lineup. When creating or editing a video title a publisher can associate it with a series. When looking at lists of video titles publishers have the option of viewing the titles grouped by their associated series. A title knows what series it belongs to but it is not a requirement that a title need to know each lineup it has a relationship with. Within the publisher console the publisher may configure a lineup display to group video titles by their associated series and display only those titles that belong to a particular series.

Publishers have the option of creating a subscription from a lineup. When creating a subscription the publisher would specify the payment terms. Payment term options may include monthly or yearly billing. If a user purchases a subscription and their subscription account is valid then the user will have access to the titles within the lineup.

Within the publisher console the publisher defines the viewer experience for presenting the titles to a user . The presentation aperture within a presentation context e.g. a web page in which titles and lineups are presented according to the viewer experience is referred to as a player. In certain embodiments a player can be an application that is built upon the Macromedia Flash platform.

Publishers have the ability to create as many viewer experiences as they like enabling power sellers to offer dozens of viewer experiences and basic original programmers to offer just one viewer experience with a handful of programs. When creating a viewer experience within the publisher console the publisher must first provide basic information about the viewer experience such as a name.

Through the publisher console publishers can select and enable components of the players that are to be made available as part of a viewer experience. Such components include programs that collect and report user input e.g. ratings and comments and tools that allow a user to share the content with others.

Additionally beyond selecting a pre built player from within the publisher console a publisher may author a customized player using the provided SDK that includes Flash and XML Web Services.

The publisher console provides a template selection screen for selecting a player template that defines the format and layout of the player and the rules by which users are able to view select the titles associated with the player. The visual presentation of the player is defined by a player template . The service platform includes a variety of player templates that each has a different theme and style. Themes establish look and feel for control and elements. Styles set fonts and colors on items like text buttons and controls. By choosing a player template with a specific desired layout of text images lists controls and video playback space the publisher determines the layout of the player.

After the publisher selects and configures the player template the publisher console provides the publisher with a style editing screen that enables the publisher to customize the look and feel of the player.

After specifying the aesthetics of the player the publisher selects the content to be presented in the player in a content editing screen. An example of a content editing screen in shown in . To add content to the template the publisher enters a video title or lineup in the appropriate location of the template. In some embodiments the content editing screen provides the publisher with a button that when pressed allows the publisher to add delete or edit content. If the publisher indicates the desire to add content to the template the publisher console presents the publisher with two main options choose titles from a whole library or select a lineup from a list of existing lineups. If a publisher selects the source to be the complete library the publisher is given the option to sort the list alphabetically or by date Newest to oldest oldest to newest . If the publisher selects a lineup the publisher console presents the publisher with a lineup picker similar to the title picker described above for selecting lineups from a lineup management screen not shown .

The lineup management screen includes a first section that lists all lineups provided by the publisher and a second section that displays information about a selected lineup. The lineups are listed in a data grid that displays the names of the lineups and their titles. The data grid allows for sorting on each column and type ahead filtering on the name. When selected the lineup detail panel displays the name of the lineup a description of the content contained in the lineup and a thumbnail image. The detail panel also displays a scrollable ordered list of titles contained in the lineup. In some embodiments the scroll bars only appear if the list exceeds the size of the panel. The detail panel includes a sub panel that displays information about a title that has been selected by the publisher . When a title is selected in the sub panel the title detail sub panel displays information related to the title. Such information may include a name genre description and ID number of the title. In some embodiments a small video window is displayed with controls to play the full length video or preview clip. Within the lineup management screen the publisher may create a new lineup or edit an existing lineup.

A player can present a single lineup or multiple lineups. The lineups may include non dynamic lineups dynamic lineups or a combination of both. The publisher for example may create a player that has a fixed number of pre placed tabs or buttons that are each associated with a different lineup. The publisher may also configure the player to display the description and or thumbnail of the lineup after the corresponding button is selected. In another example the publisher could configure the player such that a single tab button corresponds to an initial lineup whose list of titles are to be loaded and played first. At any time the publisher can add or delete lineups from a player and change the order in which the lineups are displayed.

In some embodiments the player is configured to send usage data when lineups are viewed by users . The usage data may include the names of the titles within the lineups that are accessed and played. If a lineup is accessed by a user usage data may include one or more of the following a publisher ID a player ID a player name a lineup ID and a video title ID.

The content editing screen also enables the publisher to add delete and edit graphics and text displayed in the player. shows an example of a content editing screen in which the publisher adds a link to an image displayed in the player.

After the publisher specifies the content to be presented in the player the publisher console provides the publisher with a player preview screen. An example of a preview screen is shown in . The player preview screen allows the publisher to preview the player before publishing it. If the publisher wants to make further changes to the player the publisher can return to the previous screens and the return to the preview screen to view the player. The publisher may continue to make changes to the player and preview the results until the publisher is satisfied with the player.

After the publisher finishes defining the player the publisher console provides the publisher with a presentation content code i.e. a presentation facility that can be incorporated into the publisher s web page or potentially into any other web page. shows an example of a presentation content code .

The presentation content code contains a player ID for the player e.g. experienceID 5 . When the presentation content code is placed in a publisher s or affiliate s web page the web page can retrieve the player from the service platform . When a user at client opens the web page the embedded presentation content code invokes the service platform to supply the client with the player associated with the player ID contained in the presentation content code . Changing the player ID provided in the presentation content code changes the player that is loaded from the content library of service platform . show a database schema used in the content library . As the user interacts with the player the player communicates with the service platform and loads the appropriate titles and or lineups to be displayed. A publisher may also instruct the presentation content code to initially load specifics titles and or line ups on invocation. Through this mechanism a publisher can use the same content management system that controls the text and graphic content in their web page to control the content that is delivered through a player in their web page. The player is presented to the user as if it is being supplied directly from the web page.

The service provides tools to publishers that allow them to market their product offerings within the service platform network including the publisher s websites or affiliate websites and externally through marketing partners customer messaging and search engines. Assets provisioned into the service are not immediately made available for use and access by users . Instead the service platform provides publishers with a set of tools for defining and making titles and lineups available to users including controls on scheduling and distribution. Publishers also are provided a variety of tools for highlighting and promoting programs placing program information into search engines and managing program availability on an ongoing basis. While many published programs are made immediately available often publishers want to control their availability on a scheduled or embargoed basis. Furthermore publishers may want to constrain the time and geographic availability for programming based on contract and distribution agreements that they have in place.

The service platform provides built in mechanisms to notify users when new content items become available including interfaces for desktop notification SMS and IM notification using m Qube and IMLogic gateways and email notification. The service platform provides standard templates for these notifications which can be customized with HTML or Flash. Additionally publishers have access to all opt in consumer data provided by users via the Web or an XML interface for integration into their own customer contact systems.

The service platform provides the publisher with tools to manage and bid on keywords and paid listings in search platforms such as Google Overture and MSN. Using these tools publishers manage their keyword inventory and purchase across services through third party ASPs who offer such services wrapped in a web service . For example a publisher of videos about training dogs could purchase and bid on dog training videos in various search engines with links directly back into the item level detail for a specific lineup or title. The service platform automatically generates HTML text pages for each program in the system which can be URL accessed linked to by any affiliate or consumer website and available as part of an rich site summary feed ensuring that all media can participate in broader Internet sites and search engines.

In addition to paid keyword campaigns for the content items the service platform provides a set of services to automatically integrate information regarding the content items into search engines as well as optimizing content for search engines through linking and sharing techniques.

The service platform ensures that uploaded media content and meta data is spider accessible through an HTML document. The service platform automatically publishes an indexer robot friendly version of content. Additionally various components of the service have a permanent URL link permalink including major sections and sub sections publisher home screens video detail screens videos themselves and even cue points within a specific video. The service platform automatically publishes new and updated content meta data into search engines such as those provided by Yahoo Google SingingFish and MSN s emerging audio video indexing services.

The service platform implements an environment where publishers and users are brought together in an online marketplace. Various packaging and pricing options are available to publishers ranging from ad free media paid for entirely by the consumer to ad supported media which is free to the viewer. Support for a variety of advertising related needs is integral to the service offering.

In the service video products are delivered and viewed using the power and flexibility of network connected PCs. This enables rich media advertising to be integrated with packaged content items in ways that are not possible with traditional video distribution systems such as broadcast or cable television. For example ads can be comprised of video with overlay graphics and interactive areas enabling the user to click on parts of the ad to get more information or to change the course of the ad itself. In general the full power of interactive media can be applied to ads that are delivered in media packages.

The service also makes it easy and automatic for ads to be associated with video products based on content and viewer demographics. This enables advertising to be focused in ways that bring more value to both the advertiser and the viewer. The service platform provides a rich set of tools for integrating advertising into the media package optimizing the needs of producers viewers and advertisers.

In some embodiments the publisher console provides the publisher with tools to offer ad supported programs. Advertisements may be simple video streams or be interactive or even be overlaid on the video stream itself such as in an icon or sidebar or a scrolling footer. Interactive advertisements may be created which allow a user to follow a link to more detailed information. The viewing of advertisement links may be deferred so that a user may view a program with minimal interruption while building a list of links and promotions to be viewed at a later time.

The ad insertion tools allows the publisher to define the placement and accepted formats of advertising and the content delivery engine dynamically matches and serves advertisements based on the content and user context. Media packages and advertisements can have meta data linked to them that describes the content. This meta data is used by the service to automatically associate ads with programs that have related content targeting ads to users that are more likely to respond to them and improving the consumer s experience by showing ads that are tailored to their interests. Additionally as more information is known about a consumer s preferences and demographics the personalization module e.g. provided by ChoiceStream is used to inform the ad matching process and to target ads at specific groups of viewers.

After the publisher provisions and publishes a program the publisher console provides the publisher with an interface in which the publisher can set advertising cue points in the player and choose the quantity and format of advertising at these cue points. For example for a 45 minute video a publisher could set a cue point for pre roll advertising that enables 2 20 second video spots another cue point at a transition 15 minutes into the program where they enable an overlay based advertisement another cue point at 35 minutes that inserts 3 video spots and so on.

Additional information can be associated with these cue points to increase the likely hood of relevant advertising. The ad insertion tool allows the publisher to define the placement and accepted formats of advertising and the content delivery engine dynamically matches and serves advertisements based on the content and user context.

The service platform and the delivered viewer experiences support a selection of advertising templates and advertising areas in which a video banner logo or any other graphic or textual advertisement or promotional content can be placed. Advertisers may bid on or purchase advertising areas so that their advertisement appears in the publisher s or affiliate s player. The advertising areas can also be used by the publisher to promote new services and or products offered by the publisher . In some embodiments the publisher populates the advertising areas and defines simple rules for their display e.g. time windows rotation behavior etc. . In some embodiments the advertisers themselves have access to the areas and can populate the areas and define simple rules for their display.

The service allows different renditions of ads to be served to a user based on the method that the user uses to view the ads for optimal viewing. For example in a web browser ads are able to take full advantage of the capabilities of Flash and Flash Video in a streaming delivery. In full screen mode fewer capabilities are available. When viewing on a television interactions with a remote control are supported.

The desktop client provided to a user enables different forms of advertisements to be displayed. The desktop client enables rich forms of ads images video and interactive ads. These ads can be displayed in different ways. They can be displayed pre roll overlaid in feed or post roll. The desktop client displays a canvas over the running video and can detect keystrokes and mouse movements from the user . These events can result in different types of actions including navigating to a web site and capturing information for reporting.

To reduce the impact that ads have on the download times of media packages ads may be cached on the consumer s client computer . This enables an ad that may be shown multiple times to be delivered only once and not incur any delivery cost for other products into which it is inserted.

The service platform provides tools for advertisers to purchase available inventory and to change their purchases dynamically based on market conditions. When the service is an online system with direct customer interaction no advance notice is necessary to change the advertising associated with a particular media product as there is in a traditional broadcast distribution system. As advertisers needs change they can adjust their campaigns on the fly and those changes are instantly reflected in the distribution of their ads. Also as the popularity of a particular product changes or as the distribution of users changes the service can react instantly and reflect those changes in the automatic association of ads with content.

The service platform provides reporting tools to inform advertisers about the progress of their campaigns. This information enables advertisers to respond quickly and change strategy based on the measured success of their ads.

The user experience spans multiple interaction channels including web browsers desktop clients email instant messaging IM SMS and televisions through convergence devices. Content available from the service platform is capable of being consumed on a wide array of consumer electronic devices. This includes both in home electronic devices TVs Media Renderer as well as portable Media Centers. Users are able to view their available content on any device at any time.

The service provides three primary user experiences web based client desktop client and Windows Media Center client. The desktop and Media Center clients are installed applications. The installed applications enable a set of functionality that builds upon and extends that of the web client. The features of the desktop client and Windows Media Center client are a rich environment for viewing available content ability to display both rich and interactive media ads background and foreground downloading of content for high quality video full access to the service s website ability to copy purchased content where entitled to physical media such as a DVD or Portable Video Player.

On client computer the service is accessible both through a web browser and a desktop client application. The initial access for the service is through the web. The website acts as a gateway for many types of users all with different goals and expectations. A desktop client is offered to users who are registered members and provides a richer and more compelling entertainment experience. The website and the desktop client through which content items are presented to a user take advantage of Macromedia Flash and broadband connections to ensure a rich visual experience.

When a consumer registers and becomes a member they are prompted though not required to download and install a desktop client. The desktop client provides a more exciting and higher quality environment. For example through the desktop client one is able to access downloaded DVD quality videos whereas through the web browser the consumer can only access a streamed video of lower quality. Overall the desktop client experience can be more engaging with an increased sophistication in user interactivity and visual and aural experiences. All functionality and content delivered through the website is also accessible through the desktop client.

The desktop client s functions are synchronized with operations performed through the web site. The desktop client leverages a public set of web services to process commands directed by the user . As an aid to rationally manage multiple interfaces into the same functions the desktop client may act as a browser proxy to special sections of the website. From the user s perspective it appears to be a seamless environment but the interface may be a mixture of local GUI resources and remote content. The desktop client functions in a more limited fashion when offline browsing searching and viewing downloaded content and advertisements though all locally cached and stored videos are accessible.

In the area of video browsing browse by hierarchal content categories content can be placed within multiple categories Custom catalogs provide limited view into entire available library browse through branded lineups and browse through user programmed lineups.

In the area of search for video search across all available content meta data automatic search narrowing as user types e.g. similar to Apple iTunes search results are dynamically clustered e.g. using technology provided by Vivizimo and define saved search criteria that automatically group video content e.g. akin to smart folders .

In the area of automated recommendations People like you liked this recommendations recommendations from people in your important social network i.e. your friends your brother etc most popular by viewership ratings etc. videos broken down by categories channels etc and personalized new arrivals.

In the area of editorial recommendations content reviews explicit cross sales between channels and videos reviews content and lineups authored by well known individuals e.g. critics celebrities movie directors etc and produced magazine like content that highlights programs available through the service.

In the area of preview of video Flash streaming video and a consistent preview length for example 1 minute.

In the area of customer registration authentication and account management registration is a streamlined process potential members need to provide a bare minimum of information billing information is only required upon first purchase members are prompted to answer a number of questions to tailor their automated recommendations using ChoiceStream personalization engine service can optionally remember that the user has previously authenticated i.e. save username and password in local shared objects manage trial memberships limited access for periods of time maximum number of viewings an account can manage a household of other users parental controls can be defined for certain users monetary allowances and time thresholds e.g. 2 hours per day 10 hours per week etc can be established system implicitly builds simple contact lists through tell a friend operations user is allowed to explicitly create contacts and organize them into groups include name email address IM mobile SMS info integrate with a federated identity management system to enable easy re use of existing online accounts and profile information.

With respect to the purchase process first purchase subscription or download prompts for billing information if not already known and standard billing process for credit card information and other services such as Paypal.

In the area of experiencing on demand media browser based viewing is streamed Flash video Limited resolution and screen size progressive downloads full screen DVD quality video and sound initial delay of a minute or less as buffer is built and pre roll advertisements can be shown during delay.

For experiencing delivered media full screen DVD quality video and sound available for offline viewing and display through TVs.

With respect to advertising ads are based on rich media primarily Flash and Flash Video or Windows Media Video integration with third party ad formats. Ads are blended into the viewing experience depending upon ad format. Ads can be played before during and after the video. For repurposed TV commercials during video playback the system pauses video rolls ad and then resumes video.

In the area of New Media rich ads the service offers a variety of ad sizes and formats related to IAB standards layered over video in desktop client swipes dissolves movement callouts etc interactive ads that contain mini sites for use in the desktop client. The desktop client can pre deliver and intelligently download ads and as such can be much larger in size tens of megabytes and ad placement is based on context of user and content.

With respect to reviewing and rating media provides basic rating system e.g. 1 5 Stars . Members given opportunity to write reviews including audio video reviews rate the reviewers their reputation increases or decreases and implicitly rank content based on the number of times they are included in user programmed lineups. As an example of automated promotion of quality titles the service platform could promote those titles that have both a high user rating and a high play count .

In the area of copying media to DVD or Personal Video Player PVP the desktop client allows user to burn limited set of content items to DVD receive authorization in DRM provisioning integrate content items with portable video players such as Microsoft Portable Media Centers.

For managing subscriptions bundles and purchases the service platform provides members with tools to search and browse the available lineups and individual videos and add selections to their video library. For those items that require additional payment beyond existing accepted terms and conditions the member is prompted to authorize payment and billing authorization is performed before granting access rights. The service platform enables members to build scheduled channel guides e.g. On Sundays at 8 pm queue the latest show of subscription X followed by series Y and rent program Z to review purchases and active subscriptions to mark subscriptions for auto renewal otherwise the members are prompted when subscriptions are up for renewal to bookmark content categories lineups producers and to mark favorite entries that become available for browsing through the TV.

With respect to getting technical support the service primary support through online channels email and self service knowledge base and telephone support. Online help is context sensitive and integrated into functional user interface. Where possible and appropriate wizards and other directed processes are used to guide users to accomplish key tasks.

Users receive access to the service by registering directly though the service s website using a simple registration process. They may also receive access as a trusted customer of a publisher. Users can then choose between several payment options including PayPal or credit card bank account transfer or a pre paid account.

Users are provided with account management services. Users can access their account to change profile information or to change payment and billing options. They may also renew subscriptions re activate their account after it has been disabled and review their purchase history and subscriptions.

Media programs are watched together within households. As such the system supports aggregated profiles of household members. Individual users can have their own personal media library which they sometimes access and watch on their own. In addition with parental controls family members video programs are made available to the entire household.

In some embodiments the client computer is a television. The TV interface has a limited set of user functions due to the limited interactivity available through TV remotes. Simple interactivity ties back into the PC environment. For example an advertisement served from the PC through a Microsoft extender device might have an option to get more information. With the click of a remote a message is then stored and relayed from the PC back to the service which can then queue up a richer and more interactive advertisement application playable through the desktop client.

Functions that may be made available through the TV include browse personal channel guide of available downloaded media browse favorite content categories lineups initiate on demand downloads view available videos with advertisements as required conduct simple transactions initiated from advertisements including external orders purchase video or add subscription from a cross sell ad tell a friend from previously defined contacts or groups tell me more info i.e. email or interactive ad delivered to PC and mail me Information lead sent to advertiser .

Content delivered to the service client is generally done in the background providing for the inexpensive delivery of large binary files but can also be delivered in the foreground for near video on demand experiences. The technology used to download the files is dependent on the ubiquity of the file. If the video being requested is common among users peer to peer file sharing technology can be used to obtain the file permitting that the user has opted to allow this and that the client does not experience firewall or operator based restrictions. Using peer to peer file sharing technology would result in no bandwidth costs to the service. If the video file is not available on many users machines intelligent download technology provided by Maven Networks Inc is used which results reliable delivery.

One important aspect of the service client is that it runs as a background process on the consumer s machine e.g. in the system tray and can be notified by the service to determine if a download needs to be initiated. This enables several important scenarios automatic delivery of scheduled programming or user requested downloads. In these scenarios the service can identify the user and determine what content needs to be downloaded. The service indicates the file s that needs to be downloaded and the download is initiated. The service client can process multiple download streams with different priorities and can respond to end user network or PC activity and throttle the delivery.

The service offers users a range of community oriented tools including ratings and reviews of all video products and sellers and integrated tools for messaging and communicating with other users such as friends or family members and a platform for third party websites to offer and point to service hosted content as affiliate marketing partners.

The service leverages and disseminates knowledge about relevant and interesting video content to members of the network. One effective process is to use relationships between members as marketing programs to highlight content to each other. The consumer is provided rapid and easy mechanisms to inform others within their social network of relevant content.

A wide range of tools and communication forums are available to the user community as a means to share and discover content in the service. These tools include authoring reviews and editorials including simple rating systems building recommendation generating lineups comprised of diverse titles that are potentially across publishers discussion forums for titles publishers or tangential topics externally linkable context into the service client for use in web blogs personal homepages externally generated emails etc. linkable contexts include all product links articles lineups and other textual media as well as video titles themselves including cue points within the video so as to link to a specific scene or piece of dialogue and end user to end user communication initiated from within the service client via instant messaging email SMS or other appropriate forms of communication. Such tools turn community interests and efforts into an effective means of exposing users to desirable content as well as reduce the effort required in the content discovery process.

The publisher console enables publishers to offer multiple forms of packaging against the same set of packaged content items enabling users to have access to the packaged content items across a full demand curve for media. For example publishers can offer their products on a free ad supported basis as micro payment based rentals and purchases and as stand alone and bundled subscriptions. Publishers can scale the quantity and quality of these package types while ensuring that the broadest range of users can access their content easily.

The publisher can provide packages paid for by a user . The packages may include the following rented streaming and downloaded videos which are time limited in their use purchased streaming and downloaded videos that give the user perpetual rights to the content subscriptions to monthly or annual streaming and download rights to all published products in a package and bundled packages offered by publishers with discounts. In some embodiments bundles may also be defined by the user and be based on a pricing floor and performance based discounting.

Subscription packages can vary in format schedule and price all of which are determined by the publisher . Users who subscribe have continual access to the video programs while their subscription is current. The service determines appropriate policies to deal with cancellations and breach of contract by the video producers e.g. a subscription package calls for videos per month but the producer does not fulfill their obligations .

Different levels of video subscription plans demarcate different levels of quality and options for consumption. The levels and options include consuming media in a streamed delivered or on demand manner and varying amounts of advertising. At the lowest level users have limited access to streamed content which is supported entirely by advertising. There is no subscription fee for this package. The uppermost plan removes all advertising from programs and delivers DVD quality video to the PC which can be viewed on a TV.

Instead of going through an explicit process of creating separate subscriptions publishers are given the option of enabling a subscription from a line up. These subscriptions would prohibit access to the full length videos within the line up unless the user has the proper entitlement. The user could still access the previews associated with each video title of the line up. If the publisher adds or removes a title from a line up then the consumer s set of entitlements to the titles change.

For example the user is presented with two line ups WWII and Battle of the Bulge . The WWII line up requires a subscription and includes the complete World War II video collection. The publisher wishes to highlight certain videos related to the Battle of the Bulge that are available within the WWII subscription. The publisher creates a promotional Battle of the Bulge line up that has no associated economics it is used purely as a vehicle to highlight a selection of videos. When a new user selects a video in the Bulge line up the service recognizes that they have no entitlements. The service platform recognizes that this title is offered through the WWII subscription and the user is presented with the offer to purchase the subscription.

In another example the publisher has created both WWII and History of America line up subscriptions with some video title overlap. One of these titles about the death of FDR is also available for rent. If a user looks at the FDR title contained in a promotional line up highlighting the 1940s they are presented with the option of purchasing either subscription or rent the individual title.

In a further example the publisher or an affiliate creates a promotional line up that includes a mix of pay media and ad supported video titles. Likewise a user creates and shares their own line up that mixes a similar set of videos.

Some video programs are not packaged into a subscription but users can rent these items. Users are given a chance to rent a program for a limited period of time and or viewings.

Users have the option of purchasing the program which entitles them to an extra set of privileges e.g. lifetime viewing burn to DVD etc. . Users build a personal video library by self assembling subscription packages and individual downloads.

Similar to subscriptions built from line ups a publisher has the option of creating a product bundle from a line up. The publisher can set a rental and purchase price. These prices would override any per video title pricing established. When the user purchases the line up they are granted the entitlements for the video titles at the time of purchase. A consumer s set of entitlements would not change based on any modifications to a line up after the time of purchase.

A publisher can also authorize dynamic bundles in which the publisher bases the prices of user subscriptions on volume of usage. As the number of subscribers for a particular service increases the future price of the service is lowered. Video titles or subscriptions managed by publishers can be aggregated by a user affiliate or any third party to form a custom selected subscription. Each these items are subject to a pre set by the publisher volume discount based on volume of usage by all users of those items. The usage and therefore the discounts are tracked payments are collected and funds are remitted to publishers the system operator and other parties. The cost of the user s custom selected subscription is variable depending on the discounts that end up applying to the streams that are part of the subscription. If discounts produce a lower cost the reduction is automatically passed on to the user .

If the costs go up because of reduced usage the customer could terminate their custom subscription or agree to pay more or encouraged to adjust the mix of items in their subscription for example. The custom aggregating could also be done by an affiliate on behalf of a community of users . Any affiliate that promotes and closes a transaction for a dynamically bundled subscription will receive their appropriate revenue share.

The service provides a dynamic pricing and bundling engine for independent sellers in which a consumer can purchase a bundle across publishers and publishers participate in a dynamic pricing approach that ensures high perceived value for the consumer and a fair share of revenue for each publisher in the bundle.

A publisher determines acceptable prices for all pay media packaged content items . For example an independent producer filming his friends snowboarding given their production costs can afford a lower price than for example ESPN delivering the a packaged content item focused on the Winter X Games. When choosing a video title or lineup the user is shown the cost for any available economic terms i.e. rental pay to own subscription advertising etc. .

When paying for a product users are required to provide payment account information such as a credit card or PayPal account that is used to authorize and debit purchases. With an account on file users can purchase items without having to place items into a shopping cart and go through a formal purchase process.

The publisher can set the price of a package according a demand curve model. In the demand curve model a publisher is able to easily promote content using multiple pricing models that are linked to characteristics of different users most notably the interest of the user in particular topics the user s impression of the quality of the publisher etc. The publisher defines different pricing models rental purchase subscription advertising etc and defines the context in which each might be offered.

When a user wishes to share access to content the multimedia player prompts the user to share the content by having them provide the correct information to contact the target user . For example the user may provide an email address or Instant Message handle for a friend or family member. The service platform determines whether the email address is registered to an existing user account. If so the service platform determines the rights of the target consumer to use the content for example as a buyer or renter and delivers the content to the target consumer by means of a link embedded in an email accordingly.

For a non registered user the service platform delivers to the target user a promotional message and a packaging model e.g. advertising or rental that is chosen to optimize the customer experience and the publisher s revenue. For example if the packaged content item is available only for purchase the service platform may send a message that includes a link to preview the packaged content item with instructions for purchasing. The service platform tailors the viewer experience according to economic models that the publisher has established.

In a publisher pays business model the publisher distributes content without advertising and without requiring user payment and pays the service provider for assisting in the distribution of the content. The publisher pays a pre determined fee based on usage.

Listing fees are paid by publishers who sell and operate using the online service. The primary listing fees include delivery and distribution of content per video product listed per month with a pricing scale that discounts on volume feature based listing fees such as placement in a category top level screen within the service search results or for use of advanced features such as automated video content indexing video comments etc. value added services where publishers purchase outsourced services from the service on a cost plus basis including post production encoding and content ingestion services search engine keyword campaigns professional design services for branding and free content listings. In this model all of the revenue collected for listing and value added services fees are retained by the service.

After uploading and provisioning videos into the service a publisher can specify that the video is available for free to users . The service monitors the usage of the video and invoices the publisher . The service tracks all of the video delivered and based on the pricing and credit terms either invoices or automatically debits an account on file on a periodic schedule. Publishers are able to get a report that shows them the total number of videos minutes streamed or titles downloaded. These reports show a breakdown of usage based on time and title. Publishers are able to set limit caps on the total number of video minutes served and videos downloaded by title and overall per month for the account. They also may get notification if caps are being approached and set rules for what happens when a cap is reached no more video served or notification sent . At any time a publisher may deactivate free access to immediately change any established policies that grant access to the streaming video.

Publishers may also specify that all the videos within a line up are free to users . In this situation free access applies when the title is accessed in the context of the free line up. For example if a consumer was to access the title without reference to the line up then the consumer s access would be restricted to the default economics associated with the title. Users are given an option of subscribing to free line ups.

As an example a title named Lions of Africa has default economics of a 2.99 rental the publisher includes Lions of Africa within a promotional line up called Adventures in Africa and marks the line up as publisher pays the publisher offers the line up exclusively through a travel oriented web affiliate partner the title is only available for rent through the publisher s player if a user comes to the publisher s player the user can rent the title for 2.99 if a user discovers the travel affiliate the user can watch the same video free of charge through publisher pays the user saves a reference to the Adventures in Africa line up. The user can continue to watch Lions of Africa because the context of the line up is preserved. The user creates a personal line up Future Vacation Ideas and includes the video title Lions of Africa . When the user watches Lions of Africa through their personal line up the service verifies their free access because of the active Adventures in Africa line up. If the publisher were to deactivate the line up Adventures in Africa then the user would no longer have free access. The service would need to inform the user that the title is now only available for rent.

When a publisher activates publisher pays economics for any video or line up the service checks to determine if a valid publisher invoicing account is on file. If a valid account is not on file the system prompts the publisher to provide a credit card or arrange for a purchase order. A publisher cannot offer a publisher pays video until a valid payment instrument e.g. a credit card is available. With free access activated the publisher may choose from several sub options that refine the requirements for consumer access as follows.

In one mode all users have complete and unconstrained access. The service monitors all usage of the video stream and invoices the publisher by tracking the publisher ID affiliate ID and video ID. This data is periodically summarized and placed into a database table that captures per publisher usage charges. The summarized publisher data includes publisher ID video ID total minutes and total charge. The service s publisher invoicing system aggregates these records into invoice line items which are eventually netted against any revenue owed the publisher .

From the same data a separate summary table is populated with the associated affiliate usage including affiliate ID video ID total minutes and total revenue. Based on this information a modest affiliate margin is rolled into the publisher invoice and the affiliate is compensated for the distribution of content through their presentation context .

Publishers can define per month usage caps for individual titles in aggregate for a line up and in aggregate across all titles and line ups. For each of these three levels publishers can specify a warning threshold . The threshold value can be specified either in hours or as a monetary unit. When the system recognizes that the warning threshold has been first exceeded then the system sends the publisher a notification.

In some uses the user must supply some information before access to the video stream is granted. In this mode the publisher can specify the following meta data name required unique per publisher short description optional thumbnail optional . The name is used for tracking and reporting and the description and image are presented to the user to help explain the reason for the information request.

The publisher can specify the time code where the gate is introduced. For example a publisher could specify that the video is interrupted 30 seconds or perhaps 5 minutes into the program. The publisher can manually enter the time code. The publisher selects the categories of information they require for example name first last email address mailing address street city state zip phone number area code 3 digits 4 digits . At the designated time code the player pauses the video and transitions to the form.

The player presents two user actions send and cancel. If the viewer hits send they are thanked for their submission and the player transitions and starts playing the video from the point where it was paused. If the user hits the cancel button the video is stopped and the video title is brought to the initial state e.g. video still image shown . If the user attempts to play the video again the player pauses the video at the same time code breakpoint.

On submission of the collected data the service records the following data elements publisher ID affiliate ID player ID submission date gateway name first name last name email address street address city state zip code phone number. Publishers are able to access this collected data from within the publishing console.

Publishers have access to usage reports every day. The publisher console presents some basic reports on publisher pays usage. The report data are presented across a number of different time slices e.g. per day per week per month per month for the quarter per month for the year etc and can highlight for example top 20 publisher pays video titles by total minutes top 20 publisher pays video titles by start play events current total invoice amount and aggregate usage over time with visual indicator of warning threshold.

The service provides specific reports that provide detailed usage and invoice data associated with each packaged content item. Publishers are able to specify specific criteria for the output of the report i.e. date period title ID or name for example period start date period end date video title ID video title name view accesses per title view time hours minutes per title average view time per title access and total charge per title

Publishers are offered the option to include their content in the service managed pool of free video content supported by rich media advertising. Publishers provide the service with relevant demographic and content meta data associated with their content and are able to choose the number and format of ad insertions associated with their content. Advertisement insertions are part of a pool of advertising inventory that the service sells. In some embodiments advertisers provide the service with service compatible rich media ad formats based on Macromedia Flash and Flash Video. Advertisers purchase inventory on a blended cost based on impressions and performance. The service delivers the rich media advertising in context with the video and contextually matches the consumer content and advertising on a personalized basis. Revenue generated from the advertising presented to the users is shared amongst the publisher affiliates and service operator.

In an affiliate pays business model the publisher grants access to their packaged content items to affiliates. The service tracks all of the packaged content items delivered and based on the pricing and credit terms either invoices or automatically debits an account on file on a periodic schedule. Affiliates are able to get a report that shows them the total number of videos minutes streamed or titles downloaded. These reports show a breakdown of usage based on time and title. Affiliates are able to set limit caps on the total number of video minutes served and videos downloaded by title and overall per month for the account. They also may get notification if caps are being approached and set rules for what happens when a cap is reached no more video served or notification sent . At any time an affiliate may stop distributing content provided by a publisher .

For the benefit of having the ability to distribute content through their presentation context the affiliate agrees to pay a syndication fee. This syndication fee can be brokered and collected by the service platform a portion of which can then be shared with the publisher . The affiliate pays a pre determined fee based on usage.

In one mode all users have complete and unconstrained access. The service monitors all usage of the video stream and invoices the affiliate by tracking the publisher ID affiliate ID and video ID. This data is periodically summarized and placed into a database table that captures affiliate usage charges. The summarized data includes affiliate ID video ID total minutes and total charge. The service s affiliate invoicing system aggregates these records into invoice line items which are eventually netted against any revenue owed the affiliate .

From the same data a separate summary table is populated with the associated revenue owed a publisher including publisher ID video ID total minutes and total revenue.

Affiliates can define per month usage caps for individual titles in aggregate for a line up and in aggregate across all titles and line ups. For each of these three levels affiliates can specify a warning threshold . The threshold value can be specified either in hours or as a monetary unit. When the system recognizes that the warning threshold has been first exceeded then the system sends the publisher a notification.

In some uses the user must supply some information before access to the video stream is granted. In this mode the affiliate can specify the following meta data name required unique per affiliate short description optional thumbnail optional . The name is used for tracking and reporting and the description and image are presented to the user to help explain the reason for the information request.

The affiliate can specify the time code where the gate is introduced. For example an affiliate could specify that the video is interrupted 30 seconds or perhaps 5 minutes into the program. The affiliate can manually enter the time code. The affiliate selects the categories of information they require for example name first last email address mailing address street city state zip phone number area code 3 digits 4 digits . At the designated time code the player pauses the video and transitions to the form.

The player presents two user actions send and cancel. If the viewer hits send they are thanked for their submission and the player transitions and starts playing the video from the point where it was paused. If the user hits the cancel button the video is stopped and the video title is brought to the initial state e.g. video still image shown . If the user attempts to play the video again the player pauses the video at the same time code breakpoint.

On submission of the collected data the service records the following data elements affiliate ID player ID submission date gateway name first name last name email address street address city state zip code phone number. Affiliates are able to access this collected data from within the affiliate console.

Affiliates have access to usage reports every day. The affiliate console presents some basic reports on affiliate pays usage. The report data are presented across a number of different time slices e.g. per day per week per month per month for the quarter per month for the year etc and can highlight for example top 20 affiliate pays video titles by total minutes top 20 affiliate pays video titles by start play events current total invoice amount and aggregate usage over time with visual indicator of warning threshold.

The service provides specific reports that provide detailed usage and invoice data associated with each packaged content item. Affiliates are able to specify specific criteria for the output of the report i.e. date period title ID or name for example period start date period end date video title ID video title name view accesses per title view time hours minutes per title average view time per title access and total charge per title

The service platform manages the flow of money in accordance with the applicable business model. The sources of revenue in the business models can include publishers affiliates advertisers and users . The revenue is distributed to publishers affiliates and the system operator.

An open marketplace provides a publishing selling marketing and user experience platform for rights holders and both a distributed and centralized end consumer experience. The content distributor may operate one or more open marketplaces as a retail environment that acts a distribution channel for the packaged content items provisioned by the publishers . The content distributor may promote and offer for sale a selection of packaged content items from across a range of publishers.

The service s federated deployment approach enables publishers to develop and offer their own co branded direct selling and viewer experience environment for their video titles and lineups and to be reached through the service s consumer service as well as generally through Internet search engines weblogs and affiliates. The service allows publishers to create syndication and distribution partners who participate via co branded affiliate marketing agreements enabling both wholesale and retail selling approaches.

Federated delivery is made possible through a combination of viewer experiences their players and Web Services. Web Services enables remote websites and applications to access data business logic and content from the service platform . A player enables websites to embed a reference to a Macromedia Flash application that is actually delivered from the service platform s servers but creating the illusion that the content is delivered directly from the containing website. In addition third party developed Flash applications can include shared libraries components and delivered media from remote servers and services.

Examples of federated delivery include a publisher using the service to offer their video products through a marketing page created on their own website that offers previews of their video products a publisher using the service to offer a full viewing experience of their video within their own branded destination an affiliate embedding a promotion and preview of a video in their website and a user maintaining a weblog or blog linked to a specific video clip and embedding the experience in their own website. In addition to user policy enforcement the federated delivery service provides policy enforcement for publisher and affiliate remote service usage.

The service uses the single sign on or federated identity approach to allow consumer authentication to happen seamlessly as users move between the service and its affiliate s and publisher s sites. This is accomplished with the federated identity protocols SAML or Security Assertion Markup Language and Liberty . SAML is an XML based framework that allows organizations in a trusted network to exchange authentication and authorization information. Using these standards provides many benefits. Users can access any site in the trusted network using a single login. Users are seamlessly signed on when navigating to a partner site. Users can perform a single global logout. The logout event performs a synchronized session logout across all sessions authenticated by the initial authentication provider. Users are provided with a federated identity. Their single login grants them access to multiple sites without requiring that their user information to be stored in a central location. The service enables user profile information to be dynamically provisioned into the service from a pre existing account.

Individual users and companies are given the opportunity to register as members of an affiliate network. Affiliates are encouraged to promote content external to the service website and applications. Content publishers can automatically be enrolled into the affiliate program and is encouraged to promote the content they provision into the service platform . An internal affiliate program may extend the affiliate compensation model to users of the marketplace that create and promote personal video lineups. Users might receive a percentage of the revenue associated with the internal recommendation.

In the federation model the presentation aperture in the affiliate web page serves as a store front at which a user can directly and immediately watch buy rent or subscribe to content or any other product for that matter . By contrast in a conventional model the affiliate sites have links that funnel users to a central retail site and the sale is actually made at the linked retail site. In the federation model when the user spends money at the affiliate store front the consumer transaction occurs through the affiliate presentation context . The federation model makes it easier to convert users into customers by allowing users to watch or purchase products within the context of their current destination. The affiliate also receives a cut of revenue from advertising that is part of the viewer experience. The terms of the deal between the publisher and the affiliate may be determined by interaction through the affiliate console and the publisher console .

Any website owner can sign up to be an affiliate of the service. To do this they must provide detailed information about their business and website agree to the terms of service provide the service with appropriate payment information e.g. PayPal account and allow the service to properly review their credentials. As part of sign up the service would gather demographic and content information about their site and possibly recommend packaged content items from a variety of publishers.

The affiliate console includes tools for browsing a set of publisher packaged offers service packaged offers or creating their own lineups from the content library using tools provided by the service. Once a request for a title or lineup is made that requires publisher approval a message is sent to the publisher and that title is marked pending for the affiliate until it s approved. Once the affiliate has defined a lineup they can match it to an affiliate player unless it is a pre packaged player in which case they can provide whatever custom branding elements are allowed. In the other case they would customize the player brand as allowed and then integrate to their website using a presentation content code provided by the service operator . The affiliate console would also provide a reports dashboard that allowed them to view usage revenue and payments reporting. The console would include links and references to Affiliate help and FAQ content as well as submitting customer service requests.

Publishers have the ability to grant and restrict access to video titles line ups and viewer experiences for affiliates. Publishers may want to provide specific line ups or viewer experiences to specific affiliates. From the affiliate console an affiliate is able to see the titles line ups or viewer experiences that are available to them from each publisher.

The system tracks all transactions that result from affiliates. The two types of affiliate sales direct and indirect have different commission structures. There are two types of affiliate sales direct and indirect. Direct affiliate sales occur within a Player embedded in an affiliate website or from the result of a referral that results in the immediate transaction of a pay media product. Indirect sales are sales resulting from general referrals that do not drive transactions for specific products. Affiliates have a single active billing account that is credited based on aggregated referral revenue during the specified pay period.

Publishers may offer their titles or lineups as packages from which the affiliate may choose to pay for the costs of distribution delivery and usage of the packages. The service operator collects payments from the affiliate from which the service operator provides the publisher with any revenue based on the usage of the packages.

The affiliate model enables content publishers to work with online sites and services to easily market promote and distribute their video content. The broad goals and assumptions for the affiliate services are enable publishers to reach targeted and niche audiences by enabling website operators focused on those niches to market and distribute their content facilitate powerful forms of distributed editorial and content programming that increase the value and relevance of content to audiences provide publishers with mechanisms to easily package affiliate offers and combine pre sold advertising and brand sponsorship for these packages provide economic uplift and network effects by giving millions of websites a chance to participate in the economics of television distribution and add broadband content to their sites generate network wide scale for service enabled advertisers enabling high quality targeting and broad reach enable both publishers and affiliates to operate within an entirely self service system.

Broadly speaking there are two approaches to affiliate distribution publisher packaged and affiliate packaged. The publisher packaged approach is centered on publishers defining specific packages of content that they would like to make available to the service affiliate network. It is characterized by publishers having fine grained control over the branding and programming in their package and the specific affiliates who can use the content

The affiliate packaged approach is centered on affiliates defining specific packages of content they would like to promote and syndicate built from a broad based library of content available in the service. It is characterized by affiliates having fine grained control over the content they want to promote or even by having service dynamically create lineups for their sites based on automated recommendations.

The service affiliate network enables hundreds of thousands of website operators to easily gain access to a massive inventory library of relevant video content for their websites and to easily promote and syndicate the content into their sites. In this model affiliates more freely create lineups of the library of service content and offer that via affiliate branded players.

Publisher control over the branding of the affiliate experience is enabled by a range of Affiliate Player templates. The publisher can deeply brand the player container. The publisher can define multiple affiliate players based on the type of affiliate and the package of content. For example a content source may create a specific affiliate player for a WWII package and within that create an affiliate player that is geared towards teaser promotional content with some free ad supported products and one that is a full pay media package view into the WWII library and yet another that is simply a previews links player that drives the users back to their own website to purchase the subscription product.

Packages support both promotional players e.g. marketing links with link referral mechanism and syndicated content players e.g. where full content is viewed in affiliate website . Players also support Affiliate co branding e.g. affiliate has ability to provide one or more brand assets that match the template and incorporate their own branding into the experience. A publisher could optionally allow the affiliate to set colors and styles to match their website.

The service collected revenues may be shared and distributed. Gross revenues from pay and advertising revenue may be shared between an affiliate a publisher and the service operator. Any website owner can become an affiliate of the service in a self service manner. Leads and transactions are tracked from the affiliate through the service or a federated service co branded with the service. In some embodiments affiliates receive 10 15 of gross revenue.

After affiliate deductions the publisher receives a portion of the revenue. In some embodiments the publisher s portion is approximately 70 of the revenue. The service provides publishers with detailed usage reporting so that publishers can determine any royalties they need to pay associated with their rights. The service is not responsible for paying any royalties associated with publisher rights.

After affiliate and publisher deductions the service collects the remaining portion of the revenue. In some embodiments the service collects approximately 30 of the revenue.

As one specific example suppose that over a 1 year period a small action sports video publisher offers five 5 40 minute videos through the service. The publisher packages these videos for rental for purchase and as a bundled subscription. The publisher also offers one of the videos for free with advertising but are doing this primarily as a marketing vehicle to attract users to pay media as they do not expect sufficient impressions to return their cost of production. The publisher prices rentals at 3 purchases at 10 and an annual bundled subscription to all five videos for 30. The publisher s products are offered through a variety of sports related affiliates and websites which drives approximately 50 of the transactions with their content. Over the course of the year 10 000 users rent at least one video 3 000 users purchase at least one video and 1 000 users purchase the bundled subscription. The free product is viewed by 140 000 users over the course of the year. Revenue for this scenario would work as follows listing fees. 50 month or 600 in annual revenue to the service gross revenue rentals 30 000 annual purchase 30 000 annual subscriptions 30 000 annual advertising 7 000 annual total 100 000 revenue share total affiliate revenue 100k 50 15 7 500 publisher revenue 92 500 70 65 000 the service revenue 92 500 30 28 000.

When a user purchases content through an affiliate during the transaction process the multimedia player provides the ID of the affiliate to whom the purchase is to be credited and a referral type code direct or indirect or even some other category . When the invoice is processed and accepted a payable item is added to the corresponding affiliate s current account and a separate payable item is added to the corresponding publisher s current account. Note that the addition of the payable item is only done after the customer sales order has been processed. This way the revenue is secured before paying out to the publisher and the affiliate .

The components of the content distribution system can be implemented at least in part in digital electronic circuitry analog electronic circuitry or in computer hardware firmware software or in combinations of them. The components of the content distribution system can be implemented as a computer program product i.e. a computer program tangibly embodied in an information carrier e.g. in a machine readable storage device or in a propagated signal for execution by or to control the operation of data processing apparatus e.g. a programmable processor a computer or multiple computers. A computer program can be written in any form of programming language including compiled or interpreted languages and it can be deployed in any form including as a stand alone program or as a module component subroutine or other unit suitable for use in a computing environment. A computer program can be deployed to be executed on one computer or on multiple computers at one site or distributed across multiple sites and interconnected by a communication network.

Method steps associated with content distribution system can be performed by one or more programmable processors executing a computer program to perform functions of the invention by operating on input data and generating an output. Method steps can also be performed by and apparatus of the invention can be implemented as special purpose logic circuitry e.g. an FPGA field programmable gate array or an ASIC application specific integrated circuit .

Processors suitable for the execution of a computer program include by way of example both general and special purpose microprocessors and any one or more processors of any kind of digital computer. Generally a processor will receive instructions and data from a read only memory or a random access memory or both. The essential elements of a computer are a processor for executing instructions and one r more memory devices for storing instructions and data. Generally a computer will also include or be operatively coupled to receive data from or transfer data to or both one or more mass storage devices for storing data e.g. magnetic magneto optical disks or optical disks. Information carriers suitable for embodying computer program instructions and data include all forms of non volatile memory including by way of example semiconductor memory devices e.g. EPROM EEPROM and flash memory devices magnetic disks e.g. internal hard disks or removable disks magneto optical disks and CD ROM and DVD ROM disks. The processor and the memory can be supplemented by or incorporated in special purpose logic circuitry.

