---

title: Methods, systems, and computer program products for implementing bandwidth control services
abstract: Methods, systems, and computer program products for implementing bandwidth control services are provided. The method includes assigning a quality of service preference to a device. The method also includes associating a service session with the device. The method further includes executing a control action for at least one other simultaneously occurring service session when a quality of service level of the service session differs from the quality of service preference by a specified degree. The control action is operable for producing and maintaining the quality of service preference.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=08098582&OS=08098582&RS=08098582
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property I, L.P.
number: 08098582
owner_city: Atlanta
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20051214
---
This application claims priority to U.S. Provisional Application No. 60 667 018 filed on Mar. 31 2005. This application is related to commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 304 264 entitled METHODS SYSTEMS AND COMPUTER PROGRAM PRODUCTS FOR PROVIDING TRAFFIC CONTROL SERVICES filed on Dec. 14 2005. These applications are incorporated by reference herein in their entireties.

The present invention relates generally to communications services and more particularly to methods systems and computer program products for implementing bandwidth control services.

Digital Subscriber Line DSL technology is a copper loop transmission technology that provides increased bandwidth in the last mile between communication service providers and the users of these services. DSL technology provides broadband speed over a conventional phone wire which in turn allows service providers to provide multimedia applications e.g. video VoIP Internet etc. to their customers over their existing outside plant infrastructure.

Various services e.g. television services however typically consume large amounts of bandwidth on a DSL connection. When multiple services e.g. television video music downloading gaming etc. are simultaneously utilized for a single account e.g. household the overall quality of these services can be negatively impacted due to strain on the available bandwidth e.g. transmission delays or dropped packets resulting in loss of quality such as reduced VoIP voice quality. Customers may have some rudimentary knowledge of these issues and attempt to troubleshoot by activating and deactivating various services. However they may not be able to resolve the issues unless they are given specific information about the nature of the issues and suggested courses of action for correcting the issues and even then the complexities associated with potential solutions may be overwhelming to the user customer. Further the customer may not have direct control over various aspects of resources or the network which could be used to resolve or minimize such problems such as packet priority or other session flow control parameters.

What is needed therefore is a way to automatically monitor the various services and or communications sessions determine when negative interference or impacts between them may occur and to control aspects of one or more services and or resources and or the communications network such that appropriate quality levels are maintained for the various services sessions users.

Exemplary embodiments include a method for implementing bandwidth management services. The method includes assigning a quality of service preference to a device. The method also includes associating a service session with the device. The method further includes executing a control action for at least one other simultaneously occurring service session when a quality of service level of the service session differs from the quality of service preference by a specified degree. The control action is operable for producing and maintaining the quality of service preference.

Additional embodiments include a system for implementing bandwidth management services. The system includes a processor executing a bandwidth control application. The bandwidth management application performs a method. The method includes assigning a quality of service preference to a device. The method also includes associating a service session with the device. The method further includes executing a control action for at least one other simultaneously occurring service session when a quality of service level of the service session differs from the quality of service preference by a specified degree. The control action is operable for producing and maintaining the quality of service preference.

Further embodiments include a computer program product for implementing bandwidth management services. The computer program product includes instructions for implementing a method. The method includes assigning a quality of service preference to a device. The method also includes associating a service session with the device. The method further includes executing a control action for at least one other simultaneously occurring service session when a quality of service level of the service session differs from the quality of service preference by a specified degree. The control action is operable for producing and maintaining the quality of service preference.

Other systems methods and or computer program products according to embodiments will be or become apparent to one with skill in the art upon review of the following drawings and detailed description. It is intended that all such additional systems methods and or computer program products be included within this description be within the scope of the present invention and be protected by the accompanying claims.

The detailed description explains the exemplary embodiments together with advantages and features by way of example with reference to the drawings.

In accordance with exemplary embodiments bandwidth control services are provided which include monitoring traffic and traffic types transiting a network connection analyzing the traffic measurements determining approximately when and in what manner simultaneously provided services e.g. services provided over multiple simultaneous data sessions are likely to interfere with or otherwise impact each other and to automatically adjust traffic policing or shaping or other control mechanisms in the network and or to automatically adjust service parameters such as the level and timing of device application requests or service server responses or other service related activity so as to correct the problem or avoid its occurrence and further to automatically determine and implement the best coordinated combination of control via the above.

Turning now to a network system upon which the bandwidth management services may be implemented will now be described. In exemplary embodiments the system of includes a host system in communication with customer premises and a storage device over one or more networks e.g. network . The host system may be implemented by a server operated by a service provider e.g. provider of DSL services . The service provider provides DSL services also referred to as service sessions to customer premises e.g. via a pathway which services are further distributed to the appropriate devices therein. While the system of illustrates a single pathway interconnecting the service provider of host system to the customer premises it will be appreciated that there may be many pathways leading to a single customer premises or to many separate customer premises and that the pathway may include portions where services to multiple customers share the same pathway through a multiplexing scheme.

The server may be implemented using one or more processors operating in response to a computer program stored in a storage medium accessible by the server. The server may operate as a network server e.g. a web server to communicate with communications elements such as devices and gateway . The server handles sending and receiving information to and from one or more communications elements and can perform associated tasks.

The server of host system may also operate as an application server. The server executes one or more computer programs to implement the bandwidth control processes and related functions described herein. These one or more applications are referred to herein as a bandwidth control application . It will be understood that separate servers may be utilized to implement the network server functions and the application server functions.

The bandwidth control application comprises a network policy controller operating mode controller NPC OMC and a delta analysis engine DAE . Policies refer to rules that may be implemented via network elements also referred to as resources such as routers switches gateways firewalls border controllers edge devices access node points etc. under the direction of NPC OMC . Policies may also be implemented via a network application programming interface API or network system accessed via a definable interface.

Operating modes refer to operations including parameter and or control settings that may be implemented via an application or device for handling e.g. video audio data or multimedia under the direction of NPC OMC . NPC OMC receives and processes deltas from DAE translates the deltas into policy or control updates and transmits these policy control updates to one or more of devices either directly or via a network connection and session controller NCSC . DAE receives measurements consults with relevant databases e.g. databases and performs analysis to determine problem situations select a suitable mix of control measures and determine updates. These elements are described further herein.

As shown in the system of host system is indirectly connected to a storage device via network . However it will be understood by those skilled in the art that host system may be in direct communication with storage device via e.g. wireline or wireless technologies etc. Alternatively storage device may be implemented using memory contained in the host system . Storage device may be implemented using a variety of devices for storing electronic information. The storage device may be logically addressable as a consolidated data source across a distributed environment that includes e.g. network . Information stored in the storage device may be retrieved and manipulated via the host system . The storage device includes a data repository containing e.g. documents data web pages images multimedia etc.

In exemplary embodiments storage device stores a user preferences database a user device sensitivity database a device application modes and capabilities database and other related data. User device sensitivities database stores data indicating the importance or potential ramifications of an item or event to a user or device. This may include the relative ability to leverage a particular control action or change in order to achieve a desired result e.g. to achieve or preserve a particular quality level. For example changing one parameter may have a larger effect than changing another parameter thus the sensitivity associated with the first parameter is larger than that associated with the second parameter. Further user device sensitivities database may store data affecting the desirability of exerting control via network policies versus device or application capabilities.

Device application modes and capabilities database may store specified needs specified capabilities associated operating parameter values settings ranges associated limits associated interface details associated data formats etc. For example each of the devices may have associated service needs such as minimum bandwidth requirements. For some devices such as a personal computer there may be different minimum bandwidth requirements depending upon the application utilized for a given session e.g. video conferencing music or file downloading etc. . Device application modes and capabilities database may also store error conditions compatibility data and settings including parameter values that are determined to be useful in avoiding specified issues or problems. In an exemplary embodiment the server of host system operates as a database server and coordinates access to application data including data stored within the storage device .

Network may be any type of known network including but not limited to a Local Area Network LAN a Wide Area Network WAN a global network e.g. Internet or other network configuration known in the art. These networks may be implemented using a wireless network or may be physically connected to each other in a state of the art configuration. Further the network may include wireless connections radio based communications telephony based communications optical communications and other network based communications. If the network is a LAN then the bandwidth control application and CSM may reside within the customer premise .

Customer premises may comprise e.g. a residential entity or business establishment. Customer premises include various devices that utilize DSL services provided by a service provider e.g. host system via one or more pathways e.g. . These devices in turn may communicate with one another via e.g. a local area network LAN implemented within customer premises . The network of customer premises may be wireline wireless or a combination thereof. Devices residing in customer premises may include e.g. one or more computer systems e.g. device one or more televisions e.g. devices and one or more personal video recorders PVRs e.g. PVR one or more telephony devices not shown and one or more applications e.g. video chat file download video conferencing interactive gaming multi media applications etc. executing on the aforementioned devices to name a few.

Computer system may comprise a personal computer laptop or other similar type of processing device. Computer system may implement a variety of network enabled applications such as Internet gaming interactive applications video chat graphical pictorial applications encryption tools interactive multi media applications multi media content etc. In accordance with exemplary embodiments computer system utilizes a user control interface UCI provided by the bandwidth control application as will be described further herein. Television devices and may include a standard broadcast cable and or premium channel viewing device. Television devices and may also comprise network elements that support e.g. Web TV. In addition television devices and may include peripheral components such as a set top box remote control personal video recorder PVR or other suitable elements. It will be understood that any of these components may provide computing functions or operations. Telephony devices may comprise a wireline telephone a cellular telephone or other suitable voice communications device. Further telephony devices may implement multi media applications such as video text messaging and related functions.

Customer premises also includes a gateway e.g. residential gateway RG that may serve as a DSL modem and optionally a routing device to allow one or more of devices to communicate via a DSL interface. The residential gateway may also be used to provide a firewall to inhibit viruses from affecting the devices in the customer premises . In exemplary embodiments the residential gateway includes the network connection and session controller NCSC . In alternative exemplary embodiments the NCSC may reside in network e.g. in a switch router or access controller. NCSC controls limits and or shapes traffic for each separate session present on a connection at the customer premises .

The residential gateway of customer premises communicates with network via e.g. a digital subscriber line access multiplexor DSLAM not shown . The DSLAM concentrates traffic from multiple DSL loops onto a backbone network which is part of the network . The DSLAM may in some embodiments operate on packets frames and or messages passing therethrough. For example to support dynamic IP address assignment the DSLAM may inspect the IP address of packets to direct the packets to their proper destination.

It will be understood that one or more of the elements described with respect to customer premise e.g. may perform the functions of resources when tasked by the bandwidth control application to implement a control action as will be described further herein.

Also residing in the network is connection and session monitor CSM which is in the path of the network connection that supports the customer premises in order to be able to perform bandwidth usage measurements and or other traffic measurements relevant to the customer or user. For example the CSM may be running in a router or access concentrator of the network . The CSM monitors bandwidth usage for customer premises .

The CSM and NCSC form a comprehensive monitoring and control system. For illustrative purposes two monitoring control devices and are shown in the system of . However it will be appreciated that there may be more or fewer monitoring control devices depending on the need. In exemplary embodiments each of the monitoring control devices and receives the service destined for the specific customer premises and each allows the service to continue e.g. over the network and or along the pathway to the customer premises so that service is not interrupted. However these devices and collectively measure one or more characteristics of the service via the communications signal transmitted therethrough such as voltage and or power level and or data rate and or data delay latency and or data loss and compares the measurement to a threshold or other criteria that defines what is to be expected or what is known to be acceptable to the customer of customer premises . The NCSC controls and or limits and or shapes the traffic to one or more destinations e.g. devices based upon pre defined policies as will be described further herein.

Turning now to a flow diagram describing a process for implementing the bandwidth control services will be described in accordance with exemplary embodiments. At step the host system receives customer input relating to quality of service preferences. This information may be obtained directly via e.g. a web site accessible via a broadband modem or residential gateway . Alternatively this information may be obtained indirectly via e.g. the UCI provided by the service provider that communicates to the CSM . A sample user interface is shown and described in .

At step device data is obtained and analyzed in order to determine the sensitivities and or capabilities of the devices e.g. at customer premises . This information may be stored in databases and respectively. The device data may be acquired via for example the UCI or may be determined by polling queries etc. For example the bandwidth control application may query devices and or applications associated with a user. The polling or querying may occur continuously periodically randomly as needed e.g. triggered by an event such as a user logging in or signing off of a device or application or conditionally e.g. when pre configured data is not found .

While the bandwidth control services are described herein with reference to end user devices and service sessions it will be understood that the functionality of the bandwidth control services may also be applied to servers equipment resources etc. of a provider of the communication sessions. The operations of the servers equipment resources etc. may be controlled via the bandwidth control application in a manner similar to that described above with respect to the end user devices and sessions of customer premises .

At step the CSM monitors the connection at customer premises including individual simultaneously occurring sessions therein e.g. one active PC and related applications one high definition TV etc. . The CSM monitors for example bandwidths throughput delay latency percent utilization errors etc. This information is provided to the DAE e.g. on a periodic basis or continuous basis.

The DAE consults with one or more databases to determine previous policy settings and operating mode settings i.e. current state information at step . The DAE analyzes the measurements to determine the desired state e.g. a quality of service level specified in the preferences and whether there exist any differences between e.g. specified aspects of the current state and the desired state at step . The differences or deltas may be weighted based upon user and or device application sensitivities derived from database current conditions allowable contingencies limits rules tables etc. and evaluated with respect to the desirability of implementing a policy change also referred to as control action versus implementing a operating mode change also referred to as control action . These deltas are then provided to the NPC OMC .

The NPC OMC converts the deltas into policy changes or control actions operating mode changes or control actions or a combination of both at step . This may be implemented via mapping the deltas to desired policies or operating modes using pre defined rules or tables. The NPC OMC then selects an appropriate policy and or operating mode resource at step . The selected policy and or operating mode changes are then provided to the selected resource controller for implementation at step . For example the selected changes may be transmitted to NCSC via CSM and network .

The receiving controller e.g. NCSC executes the changes in accordance with the selected policy and or operating mode at step . The NCSC may be prompted to verify the success of the implemented change at step and provide notification of said success to the NPC OMC via CSM and network at step .

Optionally the change may be logged in storage device e.g. in one or more of databases at step . Changes may be logged at a customer premises e.g. for use by a local device or application. A user of one or more devices may be notified of the change that has been implemented via one of devices or other suitable means of communication at step .

Turning now to a sample user interface screen for establishing user preferences will now be described. As indicated above a user may implement the user preferences via UCI provided to the user via e.g. device by the bandwidth control application . The user interface screen of enables a user to establish quality priorities based upon selected categories such as devices users services situations etc. As shown in the user interface screen of quality of service priorities may be set by DEVICE option USER option and or SERVICE option .

DEVICE option includes a drop down field for selecting from a pre defined list of devices e.g. TVs computers cell phones etc. residing in the customer premises . In alternative embodiments the user may be presented with a field for manual entry of a device. DEVICE option enables a user to individually select quality settings based upon policies and or operating modes for each device in customer premises . The priorities may be implemented using a numerical system e.g. priority is highest to priority lowest . The user would then assign priorities for each device in the customer premises . To ensure that a device assigned a high priority achieves optimal quality of service levels a policy may be defined for example that specifies that the device is to be allocated the highest acceptable bandwidth as compared to other simultaneously operating devices in the premises . The policies applied to each of the established priority levels may be defined commensurate with the nature of the applicable device and or application. Operating mode settings may be selected for the devices via option as well.

The quality priorities may be assigned based upon the type of user of the devices. This is implemented via the USER option . For example a user based priority for policy based control may specify that activities conducted on devices assigned to one or more users at customer premises are to be given a lower priority. The devices may be assigned to users by a user identification a device location e.g. PC in teenager s bedroom or other suitable means of association. Likewise operating modes may be selected for each user via option as well.

The quality priorities may also be assigned based upon the type of service executing on the devices. This is implemented via the SERVICE option . For example a service based priority may specify that voice traffic for all devices or users be given a higher priority than web browsing. In another example a priority may specify that video traffic for all devices or users be given a higher priority than any other application. These services may be ranked in order of priority among multiple devices and or users. These policy based priority assignments may result in a greater allocation of bandwidth to high priority services.

In addition to assigning quality priorities according to device user and service the bandwidth control application may enable a user to prioritize quality controls within each category. For example as shown in user interface screen a user has selected the SERVICE option and has further selected a policy based assignment rather than an operating mode based assignment. A subwindow appears. The user has made policy based assignments based upon services namely audio 1 video 2 and data 3. Within each service category the user may further establish policy based priority assignments. Thus as shown in the subwindow for example the user has selected OFCPC office computer to receive a higher priority than BDRM1TV. In addition BDRM1TV has been selected to receive a higher priority than BDRM2TV.

A user may also select settings that further define quality priority assignments via the LIMITS option . For example a user may specify that video traffic on OFCPC shall not exceed 80 of connection bandwidth and web browsing shall not exceed 10 of connection bandwidth. In another example a user may specify that data traffic on a device shall not exceed 20 of connection bandwidth when video is present otherwise the data traffic shall not exceed 60 of connection bandwidth. In yet another example a user may specify that specified traffic shall be implemented on a first come first serve basis e.g. where devices have equal priority.

Policy changes or updates to existing devices or services may be designated by a user or may be automatically implemented by the bandwidth control application as needed. If designated by a user these changes may be entered via POLICY UPDATES option . For example a policy update may specify that quality of service shall be increased or decreased by e.g. a number of units. Alternatively a policy update may specify that a bandwidth limit shall be increased or decreased by a percentage of the total bandwidth or by a number of Mbps etc.

Likewise operating mode changes or updates to existing devices or services may be designated by a user or may be automatically implemented by the bandwidth control application as needed. If designated by a user these changes may be entered via OPERATING MODE UPDATES option . For example an operating mode update may specify that a compression ratio shall be made higher or lower. In another example an operating mode update may specify that a parameter be changed e.g. immediately or at a selected rate until a condition is met or event is reached. In yet another example an operating mode update may specify that a device or application be turned off or on or to a particular state e.g. standby dormant until a condition is met or trigger occurs. In addition an operating mode may specify a change in time in which a service is provided. For example a user of PVR wishes to record a program however the current state of bandwidth utilization is high due to other sessions implemented by various resources. An operating mode may specify a later time in which to record the program e.g. via a lower priority established for PVR thereby limiting or controlling the bandwidth utilization for the connection.

In exemplary embodiments the bandwidth control application may include a training model or learning algorithm for each customer premises such that customer preferences may be implied by the bandwidth control application based upon customer history and patterns. The bandwidth control application may record information regarding typical customer usage patterns translate this information into a situational description e.g. via rule selection and parameter settings and periodically update this information.

As indicated above the bandwidth control services monitor customer traffic in terms of bandwidth and or other communications characteristics or aspects analyze the traffic measurements determine approximately when and in what manner simultaneously provided services e.g. services provided over multiple simultaneous data sessions are likely to interfere with or otherwise impact each other and to automatically adjust traffic policing or shaping or other control mechanisms in the network and or to automatically adjust device and or service provider related and or service parameters such as the level and timing of device application requests or service server responses or other service related activity so as to correct the problem or avoid its occurrence and further to automatically determine and implement the best coordinated combination of control via the above.

In exemplary embodiments user preferences may be established presenting the user with an available fixed quantity of graphical objects or icons each of which represents an amount of traffic capacity the number of objects increasing or decreasing according to the capacity of the data connection. The user may then place a desired number of bandwidth objects into an area on the user interface screen representing a specific device or session or general type of session e.g. video telephony music downloading . In this way the user is provided with a visual indication of the relative capacity assignments. Other methods may also be used including for example adjusting the segments of a pie chart.

As described above the exemplary embodiments can be implemented in the form of computer implemented processes and apparatuses for practicing those processes. The exemplary embodiments can also be implemented in the form of computer program code containing instructions embodied in tangible media such as floppy diskettes CD ROMs hard drives or any other computer readable storage medium wherein when the computer program code is loaded into and executed by a computer the computer becomes an apparatus for practicing the embodiments. Exemplary embodiments can also be implemented in the form of computer program code for example whether stored in a storage medium loaded into and or executed by a computer or transmitted over some transmission medium loaded into and or executed by a computer or transmitted over some transmission medium such as over electrical wiring or cabling through fiber optics or via electromagnetic radiation wherein when the computer program code is loaded into an executed by a computer the computer becomes an apparatus for practicing the embodiments. When implemented on a general purpose microprocessor the computer program code segments configure the microprocessor to create specific logic circuits.

While the invention has been described with reference to exemplary embodiments it will be understood by those skilled in the art that various changes may be made and equivalents may be substituted for elements thereof without departing from the scope of the invention. In addition many modifications may be made to adapt a particular situation or material to the teachings of the invention without departing from the essential scope thereof. Therefore it is intended that the invention not be limited to the particular embodiments disclosed for carrying out this invention but that the invention will include all embodiments falling within the scope of the claims. Moreover the use of the terms first second etc. do not denote any order or importance but rather the terms first second etc. are used to distinguish one element from another. Furthermore the use of the terms a an etc. do not denote a limitation of quantity but rather denote the presence of at least one of the referenced item.

