---

title: System and method for managing broadband services
abstract: A system and method are described for selecting a service state using a configurable abstraction layer. A comparison is made between network parameters of a Network Performance Layer and network services of a Service Layer. Once network parameters are within a threshold for providing a given service, a state change can be made in the configuration parameters to suit the provided service.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07453822&OS=07453822&RS=07453822
owner: AT&T Intellectual Property I, L.P.
number: 07453822
owner_city: Reno
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050118
---
The present invention relates to the field of providing communications services. In particular the present invention relates to a system and method that provides a service state table that matches an operational specification for a service application such as video or voice to a performance capacity of a communications network to provide the service application to a particular customer.

Current broadband communication networks such as ADSL Asynchronous Digital Subscriber Line networks provide services such as voice data and video to a customer. Hyper Text Transfer Protocol HTTP service is commonly provided for web browsing. Voice communication service can be provided using example Voice over Internet Protocol also referred to as Voice over IP or VoIP . VoIP is a method of transferring audio signals using Internet Protocol. VoIP is a commonly used protocol for transferring voice data over Internet connections. Video can be provided using high volume continuous data streams over an Internet connection.

Services such as these are provided by transferring data over a high speed network connection between a service provider SP network and a customer. The network comprises dedicated or shared physical layers i.e. phones lines fiber optics which have highly variable and dynamic operating parameters. A variety of protocols are employed for transferring the data over the SP network. An ADSL connection for example operates over existing telephone lines. An ADSL connection comprises a variety of network elements such as a modem for connecting a customer to the Internet an Internet Protocol IP layer for routing data and asynchronous transfer mode ATM network layer for transfer of data cells through an asynchronous transfer mode network.

There are a number of standard engineering specifications involved in providing a service from an SP network to a customer. One group of specifications configures provided services and another group of specifications describes the parameters of the network connection over which the service is provided. On an abstract level these two groups of specifications are referred to as the Network Performance Level which indicates performance parameters related to the SP network and the Service Level which indicates configuration parameters related to the service provided .

Code Violation Tolerance CVT is an example of a performance parameter of the Network Performance Level. CVT indicates a tolerable level of noise which can be present on a network while providing a given service. High levels of noise usually lead to a need to retransmit data lost due to noise. The level of noise that can be tolerated CVT usually depends on the type of service being provided. Video service typically requires a lower CVT than a web browsing service. For example a video service comprises a steady stream of data being provided to an end user. A large amount of noise on a network providing video service would require significant data retransmission and become disruptive to the video viewing experience i.e. the video image might stop or produce visual anomalies . Thus in order to provide a video service to a customer a low CVT is desired on the network. In comparison web browsing can be performed over a relatively noisy network. The web browsing data stream is usually intermittent so that there is more opportunity to retransmit data lost to high noise levels without disrupting the browsing experience. Thus the operating level of network parameters such as CVT varies depending upon the service being provided.

Within the Service Layer each service has a variety of configuration parameters pertaining to one or more network elements. For instance web browsing has a different set of configuration parameters for data transfer through a modem than for data transfer through an ATM switch. A service can be provided when parameters of the Network Performance Layer as well as the configuration parameters of the Service Layer are met. A service state change occurs whenever a customer switches from one service to another i.e. from web browsing to video or from one network element to another ATM to IP . Whenever there is a state change a different set of network parameters and service configurations are considered.

Providing services managing bandwidth allocation and assuring a quality of service should not be one time activities conducted only upon activation of the service to the customer. Rather these parameters are constantly being updated in order to adapt to both dynamic and evolving service offerings and performance conditions. The current approach to providing services is often hard coded and employs a reactive brute force single service management approach. For the most part Service Layer operations and Network Performance Layer data are often administered in a mutually exclusive manner. Current service management methods tend to rely on an architecture in which there is little monitoring of the network which tends to reduce the flexibility of the network. Current service management methods reduce support for the diverse and complex services having widely varied performance criteria and hinders reaction to evolving conditions such as changes in services or noise levels on the network. Thus there is a need for a flexible solution for automating state changes based on network performance and service changes.

A system and method are provided for establishing a configurable abstraction layer referred to as a Service State Translator the Translator between a Network Performance Layer and a Service Layer. The Network Performance Layer comprises performance criteria for operation of a service over a network layer. Network performance criteria include but are not limited to noise levels and network connection speed. Network services include but not limited to web browsing using HTTP VoIP and streaming video. The present invention compares or correlates between the configuration state of the service in the Service Layer and network performance parameters of the network element within the Network Performance Layer to determine a service state. When the network performance parameters satisfy the threshold levels specified in the Network Performance Layer the service is provided using the configuration states specified in the Service Layer. In one aspect of the invention the present invention provides a system and method for managing services in a network. The present invention specifies a service in a network service layer specifies at least one network performance criterium for the service in a network performance layer determines a network performance measure compares the network performance measure to the network performance criterium and manages the service in the network based on the comparison.

Examples of certain features of the invention have been summarized here rather broadly in order that the detailed description thereof that follows may be better understood and in order that the contributions they represent to the art may be appreciated. There are of course additional features of the invention that will be described hereinafter and which will form the subject of the claims appended hereto.

In view of the above the present invention through one or more of its various aspects and or embodiments is presented to provide one or more advantages such as those noted below.

The present invention provides an automated framework for managing broadband services. The present invention provides a Service State Translator hereafter referred to as the SST for specifying a service offering for the Service Layer that can be delivered to a particular subscriber based on actual network performance and operating capabilities of the Network Performance Layer. Conversely the SST of the present invention also provides a mechanism for providing the network performance criteria of the Network Performance Layer to meet a desired service offering of the Service Layer that a customer has purchased or wants to purchase.

Regardless of what network medium is provided and how its controlled the present invention extracts key fundamental service related parameters from the network and uses them to assess at a high level what services are available over the network. The services can be different depending on what the service provider SP is implementing. The present invention provides an SST structure that works with any network topology or architecture as well as any operational support system structure OSS or set of services. Thus the SST structure of the present invention abstracts the network topology services offered and control there to a high level that is applicable to control any underlying network topology and set of services.

The SST structure provided by the present invention is easily configurable to apply to a variety of network and network service configurations. If a service provider changes an OSS including but not limited to as sales and ordering marketing or provisioning transaction flows down to the network management layer the SP does not have to change the SST structure table provided by the present invention. The SP simply reconfigures that is repopulates or changes the values in the SST table structure . Repopulating the SST table structure does not involve any programming changes as to how the SP controls the network or provides services. Similarly if the SP changes its network technology or topology the SP does not have to reprogram how service layer interacts with the network.

Data is sent over the network from a content provider computer to a CPE by passing through Internet router various ATM switches which transfer data over an ATM network DSLAM and modem . Data transfer can occur in the opposite direction as well. Voice calls are sent to the public switched telephone system PSTN . The DSLAM records ATM cell counts for each line and stores them in memory. Network data can be acquired by the present invention running in processor . Data is collected from various network elements such as the DSLAM the ATM switch the router the modem etc. By observing the various network elements a suitable configuration can be chosen for the provided service. The SST structure provided by the present invention is initially configured by the SP at the network operation center NOC or by a user at data terminal . The present invention communicates with NOC to directly control the network configuration and performance or to provide recommendations for marketing or to adjust network configuration and performance parameters and to provide service reconfiguration. The number of data acquisition points shown in is illustrative only and data can be taken from any number of data points.

Each service state of the SST table structure has an entrance or threshold criteria comprised of various network performance thresholds. These performance thresholds are stored as SST table entries. SST table structure entries are populated by the SP with a configuration state of services in the Service Layer where applicable and performance criteria for network elements of the Network Performance Layer where applicable. The SST table structure of has been populated with some examples of representative criteria for the purpose of illustrating the present invention.

The performance criteria indicate minimum performance thresholds for a variety of network parameters at which a state change is initiated to provide a given service. Consider as an example when a customer requests VoIP service to be provided over an XDSL network. In order to run VoIP over an XDSL network layer a number of performance criteria thresholds are specified in SST table structure . The performance thresholds should be met in order for the SP to offer or provide the service. In the example of the SST table structure as shown in these performance criteria thresholds for VoIP include Code Violation Tolerance CVT 8 db and a Relative Capacity Tolerance 

In the same table entry for VoIP are one or more configurable states for providing the VoIP service over a particular network component XDSL. Changing the service state entails operating under the configuration parameters for XDSL as specified in the SST table namely an interleaved delay of less than of equal to 5 ms for error correction a Min Maximum Down an Up Attainable Bit Rate in which the downstream bit rate is between 768 kb and 3 Mb and the upstream bit rate is between 385 kb and 768 kb. When providing VoIP service over ATM a different set of configuration parameters of VoIP on ATM are considered.

The method and apparatus of the present invention supports a variety of broadband services or any broadband communications network. The SST table structure of the present invention can be configured for any combination of network technologies performance parameters and services. The listing of network performance parameters and service offerings within the SST table structure may be expanded or contracted to accommodate new network technologies of services or to remove old network technologies or services. Also SST table structure entries can be updated to reflect changes within existing network technologies or services without modification to the SST table structure itself.

The present invention looks at network performance criteria and configurable states in SST structure for a given service state to determine if a service can be offered.

The SP analyzes the input from the data collection engines to provide measured network performance data and configuration analysis input to the present invention. The SP filters or selects those measured network performance data to determine measured network performance data e.g. but not limited to maximum attainable bit rate MABR for upload and download line noise code violations etc. and configuration inputs which are relevant to providing service over the network. The input parameters are provided to analysis input . For example the present invention determines whether a particular customer can obtain VoIP by looking at SST table structure . If the SP can reduce the interleaved delay below a configurable state of interleaved delay of 5 msecs designated in SST table structure without falling outside of parameters for other network performance characteristics specified in SST structure then the SP can offer VoIP over XDSL to a particular subscriber. The SP directs and controls the network from the NOC. The service provider however may be able to reconfigure the user s communication line class of service to a higher speed line to meet the performance parameters and provide VoIP. Thus the present invention may determine that a provisioning change to a higher speed line is required to provide VoIP or that VoIP service may be sold immediately if the customer s network connection supports VoIP.

The SP may also make network changes. An SP may increase Internet access bandwidth from 3 mb to 6 mb and change a service offering from video on demand to full video service. The SP would then repopulate or reconfigure the SST table structure to reflect these changes. The SP would reconfigure the SST structure to reflect the new service state across the horizontal fields of the SST structure . If the network topology changes for example if SP changed the network to provide IP from end to end and no longer provided ATM the SP would simply repopulate the fields of the SST table structure with the relevant IP network parameters for the new IP topology and delete the ATM parameters from the SST table structure .

In box the present invention uses the rules engine and the SST table structure to correlate performance parameters at the Network Performance Layer to configuration parameters at the Service Layer to determine whether the SP can provide a service to a customer. The output from the different analysis engines provides input to the present invention. The present invention can be configured as a resident service state machine populated with each available service Service Layer . Based on the network analysis the Rules Engine determines which service or combination of services can be provided to the subscriber based on the SST structure.

In Box the actions of the Translator provides subscriber information and available services. This information can be used for network provisioning sales and marketing or any other service profile management activities. The Translator therefore provides a flexible bridge for service state changes based on correlating the Network Performance Layer parameters and the Service Layer configurations. The service provider can make each service as complex or as simple as desired. The entrance criteria can be as broad or restrictive as desired. For example premium services will generally have more defined performance criteria than basic services.

Service state changes can be driven by actions that are either proactive or reactive. Proactive state changes are usually driven by the service provider based on network performance conditions or are a result of changes in the Service Layer. Reactive state changes can be driven by the end user based on their service experience e.g. reported trouble or on a request for a product change.

A set of monitored network conditions and associated state changes are now discussed to illustrate operation of the present invention for performing state changes at times T T T T and T. At time T a service provider has initially provisioned a single configurable state of up to 1.5 Mbps downstream 128 kbps upstream high speed internet access product based on ADSL technology to a customer. Based on the rules engine and analysis input to SST structure rules engine determines user activity on the line would be primarily for web traffic using HTTP. Therefore a user subscribing to the service has their line initially provided using a fast network channel and an appropriate profile interleaved delay MABR . At time T based on analysis input to SST table structure business rules determines the line experiences impairments as a result of impulse noise and white noise conditions. As a result the present invention sends a high level provisioning directive to the NOC so that based on analysis input the user service profile is changed to a lower bit rate profile i.e. 768 kbps downstream 128 kbps upstream and interleaved delay adjusted using an interleaved forward error correction profile a common method of error correction having high latency settings and low error toleration to automatically adjust for the impairment.

At time T based on additional analysis input the user activity has evolved to run both web traffic and Real Time Transport Protocol RTP traffic a protocol commonly used for gaming applications . The present invention determines that based on available service offerings in the SST structure since RTP is not latency tolerant the rules engine prompts the NOC to change the user service profile to an interleaved setting having a lower depth setting to avoid excessive latency. At time T the service provider changes their underlying network technology for example to another ADSL version and begins offering services in multiple speed tiers and pricing models. These changes are reflected by repopulating values in the SST table structure . With these technology changes on the network side the user s existing profile is mapped into a new service profile and the user can be targeted by the rules engine for upselling to a premium tier. That is the user will be offer a higher speed or higher quality service guaranteed rate etc. based on the new technology. The rules engine can be programmed to look at any parameters for network performance and services and perform any action including but not limited to targeting for upselling. A message can be sent to a marketing OSS at the NOC for targeting the user for upselling or to request that the SP provision or provide a different profile on a customer line to accommodate an impairment encountered during use of a particular service.

At time T the user subscribes to a service bundle that includes VoIP with a guaranteed rate offering. The user s new service profile reflected in the SST structure is changed to increase upstream bandwidth to 512 kbps and the minimum rate in the profile is adjusted up to the guaranteed minimum.

Thus the present invention provides a configurable abstraction layer structure between the Network Performance Analysis results and the Service Layer. Since the Translator structure abstracts the dependencies between the Network Performance Analysis engine and the Service Layer systems an SP can choose or change any of these performance or service system components without modifying the other components.

Although the invention has been described with reference to several exemplary embodiments it is understood that the words that have been used are words of description and illustration rather than words of limitation. Changes may be made within the purview of the appended claims as presently stated and as amended without departing from the scope and spirit of the invention in its aspects. Although the invention has been described with reference to particular means materials and embodiments the invention is not intended to be limited to the particulars disclosed rather the invention extends to all functionally equivalent structures methods and uses such as are within the scope of the appended claims.

In accordance with various embodiments of the present invention the methods described herein are intended for operation as software programs running on a computer processor. Dedicated hardware implementations including but not limited to application specific integrated circuits programmable logic arrays and other hardware devices can likewise be constructed to implement the methods described herein. Furthermore alternative software implementations including but not limited to distributed processing or component object distributed processing parallel processing or virtual machine processing can also be constructed to implement the methods described herein.

It should also be noted that the software implementations of the present invention as described herein are optionally stored on a tangible storage medium such as a magnetic medium such as a disk or tape a magneto optical or optical medium such as a disk or a solid state medium such as a memory card or other package that houses one or more read only non volatile memories random access memories or other re writable volatile memories. A digital file attachment to e mail or other self contained information archive or set of archives is considered a distribution medium equivalent to a tangible storage medium. Accordingly the invention is considered to include a tangible storage medium or distribution medium as listed herein and including art recognized equivalents and successor media in which the software implementations herein are stored.

Although the present specification describes components and functions implemented in the embodiments with reference to particular standards and protocols the invention is not limited to such standards and protocols. Each of the standards for Internet and other packet switched network transmission e.g. TCP IP UDP IP HTML HTTP represent examples of the state of the art. Such standards are periodically superseded by faster or more efficient equivalents having essentially the same functions. Accordingly replacement standards and protocols having the same functions are considered equivalents.

