---

title: Appliance for enterprise information integration and enterprise resource interoperability platform and methods
abstract: The invention provides apparatus, platforms and methods according to the invention provide a surveillance, monitoring and real-time events platform to (i) enable the integration and communication of information between government agencies and organizations specifically tasked with ensuring the security and safety of our nation and its communities, (ii) to integrate information systems from federal, state and/or local agencies (from disparate data sources if necessary) in order to obtain a single, real-time view of the entire organization, and (iii) to extract more complete, actionable information from their existing systems, thereby dramatically improving decision making speed and accuracy.
url: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PALL&S1=07890517&OS=07890517&RS=07890517
owner: Metatomix, Inc.
number: 07890517
owner_city: Waltham
owner_country: US
publication_date: 20050223
---
This application claims the benefit of priority of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 601 312 filed Aug. 13 2004 entitled Appliance For Enterprise Information Integration And Enterprise Resource Interoperability Platform And Methods and U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 547 167 filed Feb. 23 2004 entitled Enterprise Information Integration and Enterprise Resource Interoperability Platform and Methods .

This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11 029 164 filed Jan. 4 2005 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 640 239 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Real Time Business Visibility Using Persistent Schema Less Data Storage which is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 051 619 filed Oct. 29 2001 corresponding to WO02093410 published Nov. 21 2002 and now issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 856 992 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Real Time Business Visibility Using Persistent Schema Less Data Storage which claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 324 037 filed Sep. 21 2001 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Real Time Business Visibility Using Persistent Schema Less Data Storage and which is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 917 264 filed Jul. 27 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 7 058 637 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Enterprise Application Integration corresponding to WO02093319 published Nov. 21 2002 which claims priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 291 185 filed May 15 2001 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Enterprise Application Integration .

This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 302 727 filed Nov. 21 2002 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Statistical Data Analysis and Reduction for an Enterprise Application corresponding to PCT Application WO03046769 published Jun. 5 2003 and now issued as U.S. Pat. No. 7 302 440 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 302 764 filed Nov. 21 2002 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Querying a Relational Data Store Using Schema Less Queries corresponding to PCT Application WO03044634 published May 30 2003 and now issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 925 457 both of which are Continuation in parts of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 917 264 filed Jul. 27 2001 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Enterprise Application Integration corresponding to WO02093319 published Nov. 21 2002 and now issued as U.S. Pat. No. 7 058 637 and U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 051 619 filed Oct. 29 2001 now U.S. Pat. No. 6 856 992 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Real Time Business Visibility Using Persistent Schema Less Data Storage corresponding to WO02093410 published Nov. 21 2002 and which claim priority to U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 332 053 filed Nov. 21 2001 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Querying A Relational Data base Of RDF Triples In A System For Real Time Business Visibility and U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 332 219 filed Nov. 21 2001 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Calculation And Reduction Of Time Series Metrics From Event Streams Or Legacy Databases In A System For Real Time Business Visibility .

This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 680 049 filed Oct. 7 2003 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Identifying Related Nodes in a Directed Graph Having Named Arcs corresponding to PCT Application WO2004034625 published Apr. 22 2004 and now issued as U.S. Pat. No. 6 954 749 which claims the priority of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 416 616 filed Oct. 7 2002 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Identifying Related Nodes In A Directed Graph Having Named Arcs .

This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 886 515 filed Jul. 7 2004 entitled Surveillance Monitoring And Real Time Events Plat form corresponding to PCT Application U.S. Ser. No. 04 21671 filed Jul. 7 2004and now published as US 2005 005330 which claims the priority of U.S. Provisional Patent Application Ser. No. 60 485 200 filed Jul. 7 2003 entitled Surveillance Monitoring And Real Time Events Platform .

This application is a continuation in part of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 138 725 filed May 3 2002 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Visualizing Relationships Among Triples of Resource Description Framework RDF Data Sets corresponding to PCT Application WO03094142 published Nov. 13 2003 and now published as U.S. Patent Publication No. 2003 0208499 .

The teachings of all of the foregoing application and patents are incorporated herein by reference. The invention pertains to digital data processing and specifically to apparatus providing platforms and methods for enterprise information integration EII and enterprise resource interoperability ERI and methods of using those apparatus for that purpose. The invention has application in public health bioterrorism border and port security public and community safety and state and local government data integration the travel transportation industry and the financial services industry to name a few.

The reality today is that information technology is best characterized as a constellation of system clusters. Each of these clusters sometimes called stovepipes contains multiple applications databases servers storage devices and network infrastructure. Each is typically allocated to a specific business unit cost center or division that is a cluster is bought and paid for out of a specific budget and its resources are devoted to a specific business function e.g. finance has its own systems and manufacturing has its own separate systems . The result has been a perennial intractable set of problems 

As a result of these problems technology infrastructure deployments have tended to be primarily point solutions rather than more useful enterprise wide implementations that provide a more cohesive universal view of the business.

Today the infrastructure for enterprise computing continues to evolve mature and expand at spectacular rates. The general increase in computing performance and capacity as well as the rapidly declining costs play directly to our advantage. Consider the trend lines of the major infrastructure components 

The continuing improvements in cost capacity power and size in these infrastructure elements have enabled enterprises to undertake ambitious computing initiatives that reach the farthest corners of their organization and increasingly outside their four walls as well. As we know however this relatively inexpensive computing infrastructure has led to its own set of daunting challenges. The proliferation of disparate isolated physically distributed and technologically incompatible databases and applications has created intractable problems and costs for enterprise IT professionals.

On another front national state and local governments are challenged to achieve unprecedented levels of cooperation in and among agencies and organizations charged with protecting the safety of communities. Many of these organizations use either proprietary or incompatible technology infrastructures that need to be integrated in order to provide real time critical information for effective event monitoring and coordinated emergency response. Information must be shared instantaneously and among numerous entities to effectively identify and respond to a potential threat or emergency related event.

Significant efforts are underway along these lines for example in the public health and bioterrorism arena. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has launched several initiatives toward forming nation wide networks of shared health related information that when fully implemented will facilitate the rapid identification of and response to health and bioterrorism threats. The CDC plans the Health Alert Network HAN for example to provide infrastructure supporting for distribution of health alerts disease surveillance and laboratory reporting. The Public Health Information Network PHIN is another CDC initiative that will provide detailed specifications for the acquisition management analysis and dissemination of health related information building upon the HAN and other CDC initiatives such as the National Electronic Disease Surveillance System NEDSS .

While these initiatives and others like them in both health and non health related fields define functional requirements and set standards for interoperability of the IT systems that hospitals laboratories government agencies and others will use in forming the nationwide networks they do not solve the problem of finding data processing equipment capable of meeting those requirements and standards.

It is not uncommon for a single enterprise such as a hospital for example to have several separate database systems to track medical records patient biographical data hospital bed utilization vendors and so forth. The same is true of the government agencies charged with monitoring local state and national health. In each enterprise different data processing systems might have been added at different times throughout the history of the enterprise and therefore represent differing generations of computer technology. Integration of these systems at the enterprise level is difficult enough it would be impossible on any grander scale. This is a major impediment to surveillance monitoring and real time events processing in public health and bioterrorism. Similar issues result in parallel problems in border and port security public and community safety and government data integration is the consolidation of data from disparate databases and other sources.

An object of this invention is to provide improved methods and platforms for enterprise information EII integration and enterprise resource interoperability ERI .

A related object is to provide such methods and platforms as can be applied across a range of industries from public health bioterrorism border and port security public and community safety and state and local government data integration the travel transportation industry and the financial services industry to name a few.

A further object of the invention is to provide apparatus for effecting ready installation and integration of the aforementioned methods and platforms in an enterprise.

Medical professionals have long used the terms gray matter and white matter to describe the differences in neurological functions in the brain and spinal column. Gray matter regions of the central nervous system the brain and spinal cord are the areas where the actual processing is performed.

By contrast the white matter provides the communication among different gray matter areas and between the gray matter and the rest of the body. In essence the gray matter is where the processing is done and the white matter is the channels of communication between the gray matter units. Or if you prefer more familiar computer terms gray matter is like the individual systems that run within an enterprise and the white matter is the communication network that ties them together and leverages all the systems as if they were one. 

Drawing on this analogy we ve coined the phrase White Matter Computing as a term to describe the communications collaboration and coordination among various applications information systems and data stores. Virtually every Fortune 500 company wants to intelligently react respond adapt to and process information instantly. They ve invested extensively in the necessary gray matter the enterprise applications and information systems and databases that currently makeup an enterprise IT infrastructure. What s missing white matter computing platform to provide the communication and collaboration between gray matter applications and white matter applications.

This new concept of white matter computing dovetails neatly with the 5 billion grid computing market. Companies need ways to manage their IT resources as they lash together their vast collections of CPU horsepower to create computational grids and storage grids and even data grids. They also need to integrate in real time the distributed data stores that these computers process and store. White matter computing is all about creating and managing both the data and the IT resources used in the enterprise to manage that data.

As mentioned earlier grid computing enables virtual organizations to share geographically dispersed resources as they pursue common goals. Tying together disparate hardware is an essential first step in grid computing. You want to leverage all available CPU cycles memory and storage to their fullest.

Operating at a higher more strategic level you need the ability to virtually integrate all relevant data from any system application or device merely aggregating the data isn t enough. The self evident value of combining computational grids and data grids provides a compelling tactical ROI that collectively reaches billions of dollars. However the underlying strategic imperative is to integrate the disparate data managed by those grids creating a higher level information grid.

Information grids preserve and resolve the semantic distinctions among disparate sources of data and content. Whereas data grids merely provide universal access an information grid unifies the information itself while it remains across multiple disparate information domains such as applications databases infrastructure and networks .

Creation of enterprise information grid services and the enablement of robust policy driven grid management capabilities are both dependent upon the successful marriage of real time integration and powerful semantically rich metadata modeling techniques.

Note that an enterprise information grid is conceptual not physical. Therefore it can be deployed with or without a physical grid infrastructure i.e. computational grid storage grid or data grid .

There are compelling opportunities to expand and enhance the capabilities of standard network management tools e.g. Unicenter OpenView . By using the views and interaction capabilities of distributed EII network management tools can virtualize and optimize available computing resources. Simply put IT can make use of distributed EII capabilities to enable the automation of its own core operational and control capabilities.

Building on the Semantic Web Service Oriented Architectures SOA and grid computing apparatus platforms and methods according to the invention are the solution that enables enterprises to leverage their entire distributed technologically disparate data portfolios. Unlike inflexible and limited EAI ETL and other point solutions that tactically string together applications merely pump data between points or require cumbersome manual integration methods apparatus platforms and methods according to the invention provide the only flexible platform that combines intelligent data aggregation seamless information integration and real time mission critical interaction all driven by an integrated rules engine. The result of this new approach is less costly faster information that provides actionable insights through the creation of vertically appropriate applications.

And since it leverages your metadata the data about the data it enables you to aggregate and integrate information in ways not previously possible. Apparatus platforms and methods according to the invention use the W3C s Resource Description Framework RDF standard a model and syntax for representing metadata as part of the global information model. That enables apparatus platforms and methods according to the invention to accommodate data in any form structured semi structured or unstructured.

In one aspect apparatus platforms and methods according to the invention provide a surveillance monitoring and real time events platform to i enable the integration and communication of information between government agencies and organizations specifically tasked with ensuring the security and safety of our nation and its communities ii to integrate information systems from federal state and or local agencies from disparate data sources if necessary in order to obtain a single real time view of the entire organization and iii to extract more complete actionable information from their existing systems thereby dramatically improving decision making speed and accuracy.

The platform has application in a variety of areas including public health bioterrorism border and port security public and community safety government data integration the travel and transportation industry and the financial services industry to name a few.

Effective and timely surveillance and monitoring of health related events is essential for early detection and management of a public health threats whether a naturally occurring disease such as West Nile Virus or a biological or chemical attack. State and local public health officials must have the ability to identify the specific nature and scope of an event and launch a tightly coordinated response all in real time.

In one aspect of the invention the surveillance monitoring and real time events platform is adapted for use e.g. as a local state or federal node in a network conforming to the Public Health Information Network PHIN initiative of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services or as an infrastructure element of that network. This provides a real time solution that 

Systems and methods according to this aspect of the invention are designed as for multipurposes. They function as a real time surveillance system a bioterrorism detection and response system and a collaborative network for distance learning and communication.

As the CDC develops standards and mandated reporting protocols such as the National Electronic Disease Surveillance System NEDSS Health Alert Network HAN and Public Health Information Network PHIN it is up to state and local health officials to understand these new requirements and develop a system to comply. Systems and methods according to this aspect of the invention are designed to satisfy all NEDSS HAN and PHIN requirements and more. They provide a platform technology that is highly flexible and scaleable meaning that it can adapt and stay current with new requirements and specifications with minimal effort. This feature allows health agencies to add data systems and functionality to the platform easily without impacting the current architecture.

Border and port security represent complex security challenges. These sites represent vulnerable points of entry and require monitoring of ocean vessel arrivals and departures assessing potentially hazardous cargo responding to immigration challenges terrorist threats and managing the proximity risk to civilians and land based targets such as nuclear facilities dams power plants gas lines and other biological and chemical facilities. Due to the complex and porous nature of borders and ports many distinct organizations are required to work in close cooperation and effectively share critical information.

In one aspect of the invention the surveillance monitoring and real time events plat form is adapted for border and port security applications providing 

Local law enforcement agencies are increasingly involved in complex public safety issues. Today airports construction sites concerts and other large high profile community events require greater levels of security including biometric identification and other methods of individual scanning and surveillance. The surveillance monitoring and real time events platform can be deployed in applications designed to identify community threats or security breaches in a wide range of settings including inter agency solutions for superior security surveillance and response. This platform provides 

Government agencies are challenged with the daunting task of improving agency wide and inter agency information flow and visibility especially in today s volatile environment. True agency wide information access for real time analysis is only achieved by being able to tie together all existing disparate data sources from any location and offer a consolidated view of critical information.

In one aspect of the invention the surveillance monitoring and real time events plat form provides a single point of access to all state security related IT systems Justice Dept Law Enforcement Dept of Health to expedite identifying potential threats. The platform can also provide information visibility across an organizations systems. The platform 

Further aspects of the invention provide apparatus e.g. a server application appliance as described above that facilitate quick and easy connections to and integration with any data source integrate with data sources as well as to generate alerts reports and other information from those sources in real time.

The aforementioned and other aspects of the invention are evident in the drawings and in the description that follows.

Illustrated system which can be embodied in conventional digital data processing apparatus including attendant processor s display units storage units and communications devices of the type conventional in the art comprises connectors that provide software interfaces to legacy and other databases data streams and sources of information collectively databases in clinical care facilities or other entities such as agency field offices or laboratories organizations such as a governmental agencies or enterprises such as the PHIN network the HAN network or otherwise. A hologram data store hereinafter data store or hologram data store which is coupled to the databases via the connectors stores data from those databases . A framework server accesses the data store presenting selected data to and permitting queries from a user browser . The server can also permit updates to data in the data store and thereby in the databases . These updates can include both the addition of new data and the modification of old data.

In the illustration databases include a database maintained with a Sybase database management system a database maintained with an Oracle database management system. The databases also include a data stream providing information from other nodes of the PHIN HAN NEDSS or other network . Those other nodes can be constructed and operated in the manner of system as suggested in the illustration by their depiction using like silhouettes or in any other manner consistent with PHIN HAN NEDSS or other network operations. The network represents the Internet wide area network or other medium or collection of media that permit the transfer of information continuous periodic or otherwise between the nodes in a manner consistent with requirements of PHIN HAN NEDSS or other applicable network standards.

Of course these are merely examples of the variety of databases or other sources of information with which methods and apparatus as described herein can be used. Common features of illustrated databases are that they provide access to information of actual or potential interest to the node in which system resides and that they can be accessed via application program interfaces API or other mechanisms dictated by the PHIN HAN NEDSS or other applicable network.

Connectors serve as interfaces to databases streams and other information sources . Each connector applies requests to and receives information from a respective database using that database s API or other interface mechanism e.g. as dictated by the PHIN HAN or other otherwise. Thus for example connector applies requests to database using the corresponding SAP API connector applies requests to database using the Oracle API and connector applies requests to and or receives information from the stream or information source use PHIN appropriate HAN appropriate NEDSS appropriate or other stream or network appropriate requests. Thus by way of non limiting example the connector can generate requests to the network to obtain data from health care institutions and other nodes on the network.

The requests can be simple queries such as SQL queries and the like e.g. depending on the type of the underlying database and its API or more complex sets of queries such as those commonly used in data mining. For example one or more of the connectors can use decision trees statistical techniques or other query and analysis mechanisms known in the art of data mining to extract information from the databases. Specific queries and analysis methodologies can be specified by the hologram data store or the framework server for application by the connectors. Alternatively the connectors themselves can construct specific queries and methodologies from more general queries received from the data store or server . For example request specific items can be plugged into query templates thereby effecting greater speed and efficiency.

Regardless of their origin the requests can be stored in the connectors for application and or reapplication to the respective databases to provide one time or periodic data store updates. Connectors can use expiration date information to determine which of a plurality of similar data to return to the data store or if dates are absent the connectors can mark returned data as being of lower confidence levels.

In a system according to the invention used as part of the PHIN network the connector and or other functionality not shown provides for the automated exchange of data between public health partners as required of nodes in the PHIN network. Thus the connector and or other functionality comprises an ebXML compliant SOAP web service that can be reached via an HTTPS connection after appropriate authentication and comprises or is coupled to an HTTPS port. It also supports messaging in the industry standard requisite formats and message content specified by the PHIN standard. The connector also provides for translation of messages received from the network into a format compatible with the NEDSS and or other requisite data models specified by the PHIN standards for storage in the data store as detailed further below. And the connector or other functionality facilitates the exchange and management of specimen and lab result information as required under the PHIN standard. Systems according to the invention used as part of HAN or NEDSS compatible networks provide similar functionality as particularly required under those initiatives.

Data and other information collectively messages generated by the databases streams and other information sources in response to the requests are routed by connectors to the hologram data store . That other information can include for example expiry or other adjectival data for use by the data store in caching purging updating and selecting data. The messages can be cached by the connectors though they are preferably immediately routed to the store .

Information updates entered for example by a user who is accessing the store via a server and browser are transmitted by server to data store . There any triples implicated by the change are created or changed in store C as are the corresponding RDF document objects in store A. An indication of these changes can be forwarded to the respective databases streams or other information sources via the connectors which utilize the corresponding API or other interface mechanisms to alert those sources of updates. Likewise changes made directly to the store C e.g. using a WebDAV client or otherwise can be forwarded by the connector to the respective sources .

The hologram data store stores data from the databases and from the frame work server as discussed below as RDF triples. The data store can be embodied on any digital data processing system or systems that are in communications coupling e.g. as defined above with the connectors and the framework server . Typically the data store is embodied in a workstation or other high end computing device with high capacity storage devices or arrays though this may not be required for any given implementation.

Though the hologram data store may be contained on an optical storage device this is not the sense in which the term hologram is used. Rather it refers to its storage of data from multiple sources e.g. the databases in a form which permits that data to be queried and coalesced from a variety of perspectives depending on the needs of the user and the capabilities of the framework server .

To this end a preferred data store stores the data from the databases in subject predicate object form e.g. RDF triples though those of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that other forms may be used as well or instead. By way of background RDF is a way of expressing the properties of items of data. Those items are referred to as subjects. Their properties are referred to as predicates. And the values of those properties are referred to as objects. In RDF an expression of a property of an item is referred to as a triple a convenience reflecting that the expression contains three parts subject predicate and object.

Listed below is a portion of a data set of the type with which the invention can be practiced. The listing contains RDF triples here expressed in extensible markup language XML syntax. Those skilled in the art will of course appreciate that RDF triples can be expressed in other syntaxes and that the teachings hereof are equally applicable to those syntaxes. Further the listing shows only a sampling of the triples in a data store which typically would contain tens of thousands or more of such triples.

Subjects are indicated within the listing using a rdf about statement. For example the second line of the listing defines a subject as a resource named postal zip 02886. That subject has predicates and objects that follow the subject declaration. One predicate is associated with a value Warwick . Another predicate is associated with a value RI . The same follows for the predicates and which are associated with values USA and 02886 respectively. Similarly the listing shows properties for the subject postal zip 02901 namely Providence RI US and 02901. 

In the listing the subjects and predicates are expressed as uniform resource indicators URIs e.g. of the type defined in Berniers Lee et al Uniform Resource Identifiers URI Generic Syntax RFC 2396 August 1998 and can be said to be expressed in a form . For the subjects given in the example is postal is zip and is for example 02886 and 02901. 

The predicates too are expressed in the form as is evident to those in ordinary skill in the art. In accord with XML syntax the predicates in lines two et seq. of the listing must be interpreted as suffixes to the string provided in the namespace directive xmlns http www.metatomix.com postalCode 1.0 in line one of the listing. This results in predicates that are formally expressed as http www.metatomix.com postalCode 1.0 town http www.metatomix.com postalCode 1.0 state http www.metatomix.com postalCode 1.0 country and http www.metatomix.com postalCode 1.0 zip. 

Hence the for the predicates is http and is www.metatomix.com postalCode 1.0. The portions are and respectively. It is important to note that the listing is in some ways simplistic in that each of its objects is a literal value. Commonly an object may itself be another subject with its own objects and predicates. In such cases a resource can be both a subject and an object e.g. an object to all upstream resources and a subject to all downstream resources and properties. Such branching allows for complex relationships to be modeled within the RDF triple frame work.

FIGS. 1A 1B of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 302 764 filed Nov. 21 2002 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Querying a Relational Data Store Using Schema Less Queries corresponding to PCT Application WO03044634 published May 30 2003 depict an architecture for a preferred hologram data store according to the invention. Those figures and the accompanying text are specifically incorporated herein by reference. As shown and discussed there the illustrated store includes a model document store and a model document manager. It also includes a relational triples store a relational triples store manager and a parser interconnected as shown in the drawing.

As indicated in the aforementioned figures and discussed in the accompanying text RDF triples maintained by the store are received from the databases via connectors and or from time based data reduction module in the form of document objects e.g. of the type generated from a Document Object Model DOM in a JAVA C or other application. These are stored in the model document store as such i.e. document objects particularly using the tables and inter table relationships shown in those figures.

The model document manager manages storage retrieval of the document object to from the model document store. The manager comprises the Slide content management and integration framework publicly available through the Apache Software Foundation. It stores and retrieves document objects to and from the store in accord with the WebDAV protocol. Those skilled in the art will of course appreciate that other applications can be used in place of Slide and that document objects can be stored retrieved from the store in accord with other protocols industry standard proprietary or otherwise.

However use of the WebDAV protocol allows for adding updating and deleting RDF document objects using a variety of WebDAV client tools e.g. Microsoft Windows Explorer Microsoft Office XML Spy or other such tools available from a variety of vendors in addition to adding updating and deleting document objects via connectors and or time based data reduction module. This also allows for presenting the user with a view of a traversable file system with RDF documents that can be opened directly in XML editing tools or from Java programs supporting WebDAV protocols or from processes on remote machines via any HTTP protocol on which WebDAV is based.

With continued reference to the aforementioned incorporated figures and accompanying text RDF triples received by the store are also stored to a relational database that is managed and accessed by a conventional relational database management system RDBMS operating in accord with the teachings hereof. In that database the triples are divided into their constituent components subject predicate and object which are indexed and stored to respective tables in the manner of a hashed with origin approach. Whenever an RDF document is added updated or deleted a parser extracts its triples and conveys them to the RDBMS with a corresponding indicator that they are to be added updated or deleted from the relational data base. Such a parser operates in the conventional manner known in the art for extracting triples from RDF documents.

The database store has five tables interrelated as shown in the aforementioned incorporated figures. In general these tables rely on indexes generated by hashing the triples respective subjects predicates and objects using a 64 bit hashing algorithm based on cyclical redundancy codes CRCs though it will be appreciated that the indexes can be generated by other techniques as well industry standard proprietary or otherwise.

The triples table maintains one record for each stored triple. Each record contains an aforementioned hash code for each of the subject predicate and object that make up the respective triple along with a resource flag resource flg indicating whether that object is of the resource or literal type. Each record also includes an aforementioned hash code m hash identifying the document object stored in model document store from which the triple was parsed e.g. by the parser.

In the embodiment shown in the aforementioned incorporated figures the values of the subjects predicates and objects are not stored in the triples table. Rather those values are stored in the resources table namespaces table and literals table. Particularly the resources table in conjunction with the namespaces table stores the subjects predicates and resource type objects whereas the literals table stores the literal type objects.

The resources table maintains one record for each unique subject predicate or resource type object. Each record contains the value of the resource along with its aforementioned 64 bit hash. It is the latter on which the table is indexed. To conserve space portions of those values common to multiple resources e.g. common identifiers are stored in the namespaces table. Accordingly the field r value contained in each record of the resources table reflects only the unique portion e.g. identifier of each resource.

The namespaces table maintains one record for each unique common portion referred to in the prior paragraph hereinafter namespace . Each record contains the value of that namespace along with its aforementioned 64 bit hash. As above it is the latter on which this table is indexed.

The literals table maintains one record for each unique literal type object. Each record contains the value of the object along with its aforementioned 64 bit hash. Each record also includes an indicator of the type of that literal e.g. integer string and so forth . Again it is the latter on which this table is indexed.

The models table maintains one record for each RDF document object contained in the model document store. Each record contains the URI of the corresponding document object uri string along with its aforementioned 64 bit hash m hash . It is the latter on which this table is indexed. To facilitate associating document objects identified in the models table with document objects maintained by the model document store each record of the models table also contains the ID of the corresponding document object in the store. That ID can be assigned by the model document manager or otherwise.

From the above it can be appreciated that the relational triples store is a schema less structure for storing RDF triples. As suggested by Melnik supra triples maintained in that store can be reconstituted via an SQL query. For example to reconstitute the RDF triple having a subject equal to postal zip 02886 a predicate equal to http www.metatomix. com postalCode 1.0 town and an object equal to Warwick the following SQL statement is applied 

Those skilled in the art will of course appreciate that RDF documents and more generally objects maintained in the store can be contained in other stores structured relationally hierarchically or otherwise as well in addition to or instead of the stores illustrated in the aformentined incorporated figures.

Referring back to hereof in a system according to the invention used as part of the PHIN network the maintenance of data in the store is accomplished in a manner compatible with the applicable PHIN standards e.g. for the use of electronic clinical data for event detection. Thus for example data storage is compatible with the applicable logical data model s can associate incoming data with appropriate existing data e.g. a report of a disease in a person who had another condition previously reported permits potential cases should be linked and traceable from detection via electronic sources of clinical data or manual entry of potential case data through confirmation via laboratory result reporting and permits data to be accessed for reporting statistical analysis geographic mapping and automated outbreak detection algorithms and so forth all as required under the PHIN standards and further discussed below. Whether maintained in the data store or otherwise a system according to the invention used as part of the PHIN network provides directories of public health and clinical personnel accessible as required under the PHIN standards. Systems according to the invention used as part of HAN or NEDSS compatible networks provide similar functionality as particularly required under those initiatives.

The relational triples store manager discussed above supports SQL queries such as the one exemplified above for extracting a triple with the subject postal zip 02886 the predicate http www.metatomix.com postalCode 1.0 town and the object Warwick in the manner described in commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 302 764 filed Nov. 21 2002 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR QUERYING A RELATIONAL DATA STORE USING SCHEMA LESS QUERIES the teachings of which are incorporated herein by reference see specifically for example thereof and the accompanying text .

The data store can likewise include time wise data reduction component of the type described in commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 302 727 filed Nov. 21 2002 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR STATISTICAL DATA ANALYSIS AND REDUCTION FOR AN ENTERPRISE APPLICATION the teachings of which are incorporated herein by reference see specifically for example thereof and the accompanying text to perform a time wise reduction on data from the database streams or other sources.

According to one practice of the invention data store includes a graph generator that uses RDF triples to generate directed graphs in response to queries made e.g. by a user accessing the store via the browser and server by a surveillance monitoring and real time events application executing on the server or in connection with the browser by another node on the network and received electronically or otherwise or made otherwise for information reflected by triples originating from data in one or more of the databases streams or other sources . Such generation of directed graphs from triples can be accomplished in any conventional manner known the art e.g. as appropriate to RDF triples or other manner in which the information is stored or preferably in the manner described in co pending commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 138 725 filed May 3 2002 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR VISUALIZING RELATIONSHIPS AMONG TRIPLES OF RESOURCE DESCRIPTION FRAMEWORK RDF DATA SETS corresponding to PCT Application WO03094142 published Nov. 13 2003 and Ser. No. 60 416 616 filed Oct. 7 2002 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR IDENTIFYING RELATED NODES IN A DIRECTED GRAPH HAVING NAMED ARCS corresponding to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 680 049 filed Oct. 7 2003 and PCT Application WO2004034625 published Apr. 22 2004 the teachings of all which are incorporated herein by reference. Directed graphs so generated can be passed back to the server for presentation to the user via browser they can be walked by the server to identify specific information responsive to queries or otherwise.

Alternatively or in addition to the graph generator the data store can utilize genetic self adapting algorithms to traverse the RDF triples in response to such queries. To this end the data store utilizes a genetic algorithm that performs several searches each utilizing a different methodology but all based on the underlying query from the framework server against the RDF triples. It compares the results of the searches quantitatively to discern which produce s the best results and reapplies that search with additional terms or further granularity.

In some practices of the invention surveillance monitoring and real time events applications executing on the connectors the server the browser and or the data store utilize an expert engine based system to identify information in the data store and or from sources responsive to queries and or otherwise for presentation via browser e.g. in the form of alerts reports or otherwise. The information so identified can instead or in addition form the basis of further processing e.g. by such surveillance monitoring and real time events applications in the form of broadcasts or messages to other nodes in the network or otherwise consistent with requirements of PHIN HAN or other applicable standards.

Thus for example in a system adapted for use in a node on the PHIN the expert engine based system can be used to process data incoming from the sources to determine whether it should be ignored stored logged for alert or classified otherwise. Data reaching a certain classification limit moreover can be displayed via the browser and more particularly the dashboard discussed below e.g. along with a map of the state country or other relevant geographic region and or along with other similar data.

Alternatively in a system adapted for use in a NEDSS compliant node the expert engine based system can be used to detect the numbers of instances occurring over time and if the number exceeds a threshold to generate a report e.g. for display via a dashboard window or generate alert messages for transfer over the network to targeted personnel e.g. as identified by action of further rules or otherwise . In such a system the expert engine can also be used to subset data used for display or reporting in connection with the collaborative function e.g. specified under the CDC s HAN guidelines.

One such expert engine based system used in practice of the invention is disclosed in aforementioned incorporated by reference U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 416 616 filed Oct. 7 2002 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR IDENTIFYING RELATED NODES IN A DIRECTED GRAPH HAVING NAMED ARCS corresponding to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 680 049 filed Oct. 7 2003 and PCT Application WO2004034625 published Apr. 22 2004 . Those skilled in the art will of course appreciate that different expert engine based systems or rules for operation therof may be applicable depending on the nature and focus of the information sought by any given surveillance monitoring and real time events application and that construction of such rules is within the ken of those skilled in the art based on the teachings hereof.

Referring to the system includes a module that executes a set of rules with respect to a set of facts representing criteria in order to i generate a subset of a set of facts representing an input data set ii trigger a further rule and or iii generate an alert broadcast message or otherwise. For simplicity in the discussion that follows the set of facts representing criteria are referred to as criteria or criteria while the set of facts representing data are referred to as data or data . 

Illustrated module is an executable program compiled interpreted or otherwise embodying the rules and operating in the manner described herein for identifying subsets of directed graphs. In the illustrated embodiment module is implemented in Jess Java Expert System Shell a rule based expert system shell commercially available from Sandia National Laboratories. However it can be implemented using any other expert system engine if then else network or other software firmware and or hardware environment whether or not expert system based suitable for adaptation in accord with the teachings hereof.

The module embodies the rules in a network representation e.g. an if then else network or the like native to the Jess environment. The network nodes are preferably executed so as to effect substantially parallel operation of the rules though they can be executed so as to effect serial and or iterative operation as well or in addition. In other embodiments the rules are represented in accord with the specifics of the corresponding engine if then else network or other software firmware and or hardware environment on which the embodiment is implemented. These likewise preferably effect parallel execution of the rules though they may effect serial or iterative execution instead or in addition.

The data set can comprise any directed graph e.g. a collection of nodes representing data and directed arcs connecting nodes to one another though in the illustrated embodiment it comprises RDF triples contained in the data store and or generated from information received from the other sources via connectors. Alternatively or in addition the data set can comprise data structures representing a meta directed graph of the type disclosed in co pending commonly assigned U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 138 725 filed May 3 2002 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR VISUALIZING RELATIONSHIPS AMONG TRIPLES OF RESOURCE DESCRIPTION FRAMEWORK RDF DATA SETS e.g. at and accompanying text all of which incorporated herein by reference.

Criteria contains expressions including for example literals wildcards Boolean operators and so forth against which nodes in the data set are tested. In embodiments that operate on RDF data sets the criteria can specify subject predicate and or object values or other attributes. In embodiments that operate on directed graphs of other types other appropriate values and attributes may be specified. The criteria can be input by a user e.g. via a browser e.g. on an ad hoc basis. Alternatively or in addition they can be generated by surveillance monitoring and real time events applications executing on the connectors the server the browser and or the data store.

Rules define the tests for identifying data in the data set that match the criteria or where applicable are related thereto. These are expressed in terms of the types and values of the data items as well as their interrelationships or connectedness. By way of example a set of rules applicable to a data set comprised of RDF triples for identifying triples that match or are related to the criteria are disclosed in aforementioned incorporated by reference U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 416 616 filed Oct. 7 2002 entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR IDENTIFYING RELATED NODES IN A DIRECTED GRAPH HAVING NAMED ARCS. Those skilled in the art will of course appreciate that different rules may be applicable depending on the nature and focus of the information sought by any given surveillance monitoring and real time events application and that construction of such rules is within the ken of those skilled in the art based on the teachings hereof.

Referring to back to the data output or otherwise generated by module represents those triples matching or where applicable related to the criteria as determined by exercise of the rules. The data can be output as triples or some alternate form e.g. pointers or other references to identified data within the data set depending on the needs of the surveillance monitoring and real time events application that invoked the system . As noted above instead of or in addition to outputting data the module triggers execution of further rules generate alerts broadcasts messages or otherwise consistent with requirements of PHIN HAN or other applicable standards.

In the illustrated embodiment triples identified by the expert engine based system can be output as such or in alternate form e.g. pointers or other references to identified data within the data set depending on the needs of the surveillance monitoring and real time events application that invoked the system . Instead of or in addition the identified triples can trigger execution of further rules e.g. in the expert engine system generate alerts broadcasts messages or otherwise consistent with requirements of PHIN HAN or other applicable standards.

The framework server presents information from the data store and or sources via browser . This can be based on requests entered directly by the user directly e.g. in response to selections responses to questions dialog boxes or other user input controls generated by a surveillance monitoring and real time events application executing on the server or in connection with the browser . It can also be based for example on information obtained from the database and or sources by the expert engine based system described above.

A further understanding of the operation of the framework server may be attained by reference to the appendix filed with U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 917 264 filed Jul. 27 2001 and entitled METHODS AND APPARATUS FOR ENTERPRISE APPLICATION INTEGRATION corresponding to WO02093319 published Nov. 21 2002 which appendix is incorporated herein by reference.

As illustrated on system may provide a surveillance monitoring and real time events application that includes a dashboard with display windows or panels that provide comprehensive real time displays of information gathered from the data store or other sources as well as alerts resulting from anomalous situations detected by the surveillance monitoring and real time events application. The dashboard and alerts can be generated by an application executing on the server and or the browser or otherwise.

Surveillance monitoring and real time events dashboards can display information and alerts that are specific to predefined categories such as boarder and port security health and bioterrorism or public and community safety. These can be configured by users to display information from ad hoc combinations of data sources and user defined alerts. For the purpose of describing the structure and operation of the surveillance monitoring and real time events dashboards reference will be made to two representative examples boarder port security and health bioterrorism although these descriptions apply to other predefined and user defined categories of information.

Panel can contain real time data from a port authority superimposed on a map of the inner harbor. Note that port authority data can include information related to the inner harbor that is different than information provided by the US Coast Guard. For example the port authority data can include information on vessels traveling or docked within the inner harbor. Furthermore the port authority data can relate to more than just the inner harbor. For example the port authority data can include information related to an airport and a rail yard.

Other panels and can display information from other data sources such as US Customs and local or state police. Panel displays a current Homeland Security Advisory System threat level. Panel displays contact information for agencies such as the US Coast Guard US Customs port authority and state police that might be invoked in case of an alert.

A user can double click on any panel to display a separate window containing the panel. By this mechanism the user can enlarge any panel. In addition through appropriate mouse or keyboard commands the user can zoom in on a portion of the image displayed by a panel. For example the user can select a point on the panel display to re center the display to the selected point and zoom in on that point. Alternatively the user can select a rectangular portion of the panel display using a rubber band cursor and instruct the system to fill the entire panel with the selected portion. illustrates an example of such a window displaying the port authority panel of . A user can for example double click on a vessel to display information about the vessel. illustrates an example of a pop up window that displays information about the selected vessel.

Although panels contain graphical displays other panels not shown can contain textural or numeric data. For example panels containing shipping schedules airline schedules port volume statistics recent headlines weather forecasts etc. can be available for display. Of course other graphical panels such as current meteorological data for various portions of the world can also be available. The surveillance monitoring and real time events application can make available more panels than can be displayed at one time on the dashboard . The dashboard can display a default set of panels such as panels . Optionally the user can select which panels to display in the dashboard as well as arrange the panels within the dashboard and control the size of each panel. If it is deemed desirable to display more panels than can be displayed at one time some or all of the desired panels can be displayed on a round robin basis.

In addition to allowing users to select items on panels to obtain further information about these items the surveillance monitoring and real time events application can include rules and or heuristics to automatically detect anomalies and alert users to these anomalies hereinafter referred to as alerts . As a result of one of these alerts the surveillance monitoring and real time events application preferably can select one or more panels containing particularly relevant information and display or enlarge those panels. The selected panels need not be ones that the user could select. For example the surveillance monitoring and real time events application can create a new panel that includes a combination of data from several sources the sources being selected by rule s that caused the alert to be issued.

The following example illustrates how an alert can be issued. As shown in the inner harbor can be partitioned into shipping lanes and . The surveillance monitoring and real time events application can include rules describing permitted required and or prohibited behavior of vessels in these shipping lanes and . Some rules can apply to all vessels. Other rules can apply to only certain vessels for example according to the vessels types cargos speeds country of registry as well as according to data unrelated to the vessels such as time of day day of week season Homeland Security Advisory System threat level amount of other harbor traffic or amount or schedule of non harbor traffic such as aircraft at an adjacent airport. Other rules can apply to docked vessels vessels under tow etc. Similarly rules can apply to aircraft vehicles or any measurable quantity such as air quality in a subway station seismic data voltage in a portion of a power grid or vibration in a building bridge or other structure. Rules can also apply to data entered by humans such as the number of reported cases of food poisoning or quantities of antibiotics prescribed ordered or on hand during a selected period of time.

Under normal circumstances i.e. when no alerts are pending the dashboard displays a default set of panels or a set of panels selected by the user as previously described. If for example the previously mentioned tanker vessel carrying a hazardous cargo such as liquefied natural gas LNG deviates from a prescribed course the surveillance monitoring and real time events application can issue an alert. Note that rules for vessels carrying hazardous cargos can be different than for vessels carrying non hazardous cargos. In addition other vessels can trigger the alert. For example if the LNG tanker is traveling within its prescribed course but a high speed vessel not shown or an aircraft is on a collision course with the LNG tanker the surveillance monitoring and real time events application can issue an alert.

As a result of the alert the surveillance monitoring and real time events application displays the alert panel and an alert message . In this case the alert panel displays a zoomed in portion of the port authority panel . In addition the surveillance monitoring and real time events application can automatically notify a predetermined list of people or agencies. The particular people or agencies can depend on factors such as the time of day or the day of the week of the alert. Optionally the surveillance monitoring and real time events application can notify other users at other nodes such as nodes and or . Information displayed on dashboards not shown at these other nodes need not be the same as information displayed on the dashboard . In particular the information displayed on these other nodes can be more or less detailed than the information displayed on the dashboard . For example summary information such as an icon displayed on a map of the United States can be displayed at command control node to indicate an alert in Boston without necessarily displaying all details related to the alert. A user at the command control node can double click on the icon to obtain more detailed information.

In this example the icons and represent medical care providers that have experienced noteworthy events or levels of activity. As previously described an alert can be issued if for example the number of cases of disease such as influenza exceeds a predetermined threshold. In this example Provider 3 has encountered patients with pneumonia that does not respond to antibiotics. The other alerts could relate to other anomalous events or levels of activity. Clicking the icon causes the system to display information related to the selected alert. Clicking on a link causes the system to display more detailed information about the alert. For example illustrates two panels and as well as a user selection area that can be displayed. Panel contains a more detailed map of the area in which the event occurred. Panel list the number of cases by zip code of the patients. User selection area enables the user to select one or more of the alerts thereby selecting or aggregating data from the selected provider s for display in panels and .

Returning for a moment to panel contains icons for government agencies and other individuals or organizations collectively responders that might be called upon to respond to manage a biological nuclear foodborne or other situations identified by the expert engine based system e.g. as where the number of instances matching a specified critereon exceeds a threshold . Clicking link displays a window containing emergency contact information for these responders as shown in at . Panel contains several emergency callout options by which the user can manage the alerts. For example clicking Message Board link displays a window containing messages posted in relation to this alert as shown in at . This message board enables users and responders to communicate with each other in relation to the alert. An Initiate a new Callout link enables the user to initiate a new situation as shown in .

In response to an alert the surveillance monitoring and real time events application automatically performs searches of the Internet and responder intranets for information relevant to the alert. As previously mentioned panel contains hyperlinks to information that is relevant to the alerts including results from these searches and predefined information sources that have been identified as relevant. The surveillance monitoring and real time events application can for example have a database of information sources catalogued according to alert type. As shown in clicking on one of the hyperlinks in the panel opens a new window displaying contents identified by the hyperlink.

Returning again to the dashboard shown in the user can select a module via a pull down list . For example the user can select Reports in which case the system displays a window similar to that shown in . After selecting one or more providers and the system displays a report in a report panel .

A more complete understanding of the construction and operation of the components and and more generally of the system that they comprise may be attained by reference to the aforementioned incorporated by reference applications namely U.S. Patent Application Ser. No. 60 547 167 filed Feb. 23 2004 entitled Enterprise Information Integration and Enterprise Resource Interoperability Platform and Methods U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 680 049 filed Oct. 7 2003 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Identifying Related Nodes in a Directed Graph Having Named Arcs corresponding PCT Application WO2004034625 published Apr. 22 2004 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 09 917 264 filed Jul. 27 2001 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Enterprise Application Integration corresponding to WO02093319 published Nov. 21 2002 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 051 619 filed Oct. 29 2001 entitled Methods And Apparatus For Real Time Business Visibility Using Persistent Schema Less Data Storage corresponding to WO02093410 published Nov. 21 2002 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 302 764 filed Nov. 21 2002 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Querying a Relational Data Store Using Schema Less Queries corresponding to PCT Application WO03044634 published May 30 2003 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 302 727 filed Nov. 21 2002 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Statistical Data Analysis and Reduction for an Enterprise Application corresponding to PCT Application WO03046769 published May 5 2003 U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10 138 725 filed May 3 2002 entitled Methods and Apparatus for Visualizing Relationships Among Triples of Resource Description Framework RDF Data Sets corresponding to PCT Application WO03094142 published Nov. 13 2003 the teachings of which again are incorporated herein by reference.

In the illustrated embodiment appliance is configured to provide automatic integration and correlation functions among others thereby facilitating its installation and use at a node. In other embodiments other functions may be configured for automatic operation in addition or instead. To this end illustrated appliance includes display configured to display output of the above mentioned dashboard application. Such display is optional however and may not be provided in other embodiments.

With respect to integration illustrated appliance provides for automatic or semiautomatic recognition e.g. of networks other nodes data sources and so forth automatic or semi automatic configuration e.g. with respect to other computers and equipment in the same node data sources other nodes and so forth drag and drop double click or other user responsive administration and process automation. With respect to correlation illustrated appliance provides for automatic or semi automatic ontology framework selection OFS e.g. with respect to PHIN HAN NEDSS or other public health bioterrorism applications border port security applications public community safety applications and government data integration applications among others automatic data source ontology selection and drag and drop ontology mapping. Additional automatic or semi automatic functions provided by the appliance include natural language rules administration real time reporting and inferencing. As noted in other embodiments appliance may provide other functions automatically or semi automatically in addition or instead of those listed above.

A further understanding of appliance as used on one embodiment of the invention is provided in the sections that follow.

In the illustrated embodiment appliance is an intelligent scalable dynamically configurable integration appliance provided to customers in a ready to use format. It can be quickly and easily set up turned on configured and used saving time and labor and money. B is a server based fully functioning information integration platform with unprecedented capabilities.

As such illustrated appliance is ideally suited to users who demand quick easy scalable even portable information integration solutions for a variety of needs. These include public sector applications such as political conventions military applications temporary professional sporting event venues natural disasters storm tracking many more high visibility security intensive events commercial sector applications such as small company information integration financial institution mergers for rapid integration and insights know your customer initiatives for smaller financial institutions information integration for individual travel agents tour companies and so forth. Moreover appliance handles any type of data for example wide variety of chemical radiological and other sensor data government alerts including homeland security status amber alerts etc. meteorological information traffic and transit information real time audio video feeds and still imagery ground penetrating and surface radar aerial imagery from reconnaissance flights and satellites passive or tripwire sensor readings GIS maps hospital resource data beds staffing equipment medical condition and treatment information epidemiological syndromic surveillance data customer spending and preferences and financial account information again among others.

Illustrated appliance facilitates quick and easy connections to any data source integrates the data sources and provides the ability to interact with all of the information in real time. It provides interoperability and decision making capabilities to the user quickly dynamically and efficiently. Appliance can handle additional data sources on the fly reflecting that information in the dashboard. There is no need for costly customization to data connections and dashboards this powerful system handles all of that. It even integrates an expert system to automate critical alerts and notifications when certain conditions exist based on pre set rules.

Appliance creates knowledge and provides an unprecedented level of awareness and response by synthesizing information that could not previously be organized processed or acted upon.

Described herein are methods and apparatus meeting the above mentioned objects. It will be appreciated that the illustrated embodiment is merely an example of the invention and that other embodiments incorporating changes to those described herein fall within the scope of the invention. Thus for example as noted earlier although the illustrated embodiment is adapted for use in public health bioterrorism application with additional examples provided with respect to border and port security it will be appreciated that a similar such systems can be applied in public community safety and government data integration applications described above among others.

